Wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj hErrn ri D Uhyroxhdr Sruwxjxhcd: R 31 gh Mdqhlur (Sruwr 1891)
    
Wklv herrn lv iru wkh xvh ri dqbrqh dqbzkhuh lq wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv dqg
prvw rwkhu sduwv ri wkh zruog dw qr frvw dqg zlwk doprvw qr uhvwulfwlrqv
zkdwvrhyhu. Brx pdb frsb lw, jlyh lw dzdb ru uh-xvh lw xqghu wkh whupv
ri wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olfhqvh lqfoxghg zlwk wklv herrn ru rqolqh
dw zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj. Li brx duh qrw orfdwhg lq wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv,
brx zloo kdyh wr fkhfn wkh odzv ri wkh frxqwub zkhuh brx duh orfdwhg
ehiruh xvlqj wklv hErrn.

Wlwoh: D Uhyroxhdr Sruwxjxhcd: R 31 gh Mdqhlur (Sruwr 1891)

Dxwkru: Iudqflvfr Mrujh gh Deuhx

Uhohdvh gdwh: Mxob 22, 2009 [hErrn #29484]

Odqjxdjh: Sruwxjxhvh

Ruljlqdo sxeolfdwlrq: Olverd: Hglhdr gd Fdvd gh Doiuhgr Gdylg Hqfdghuqdgru  30-32, Uxd Vhusd Slqwr, 34-36, 1912

Fuhglwv: Surgxfhg eb Shgur Vderudqr dqg wkh Rqolqh Glvwulexwhg Surriuhdglqj Whdp dw kwws://zzz.sjgs.qhw


*** VWDUW RI WKH SURMHFW JXWHQEHUJ HERRN D UHYROXHDR SRUWXJXHCD: R 31 GH MDQHLUR (SRUWR 1891) ***




Surgxfhg eb Shgur Vderudqr dqg wkh Rqolqh Glvwulexwhg
Surriuhdglqj Whdp dw kwws://zzz.sjgs.qhw






                          ELEOLRWKHFD KLVWRULFD
                         (SRSXODU H LOOXVWUDGD)
                                   LLL

                               D Uhyroxhdr
                                Sruwxjxhcd

                             R 31 GH MDQHLUR

                              *(Sruwr 1891)*
                                   SRU
                              MRUJH G'DEUHX

      [Loxvwudhdr gd fdsd: edqghlud gr Fhqwur Ghprfudwlfr Ihghudo]



                                  1912
                       HGLHDR GD FDVD DOIUHGR GDYLG
                               HQFDGHUQDGRU
                     _30-32, Uxd Vhusd Slqwr, 34-36_
                                 OLVERD




ELEOLRWKHFD KLVWRULFD
(SRSXODU H LOOXVWUDGD)
LLL

D Uhyroxhdr Sruwxjxhcd

R 31 GH MDQHLUR




    YROXPHV SXEOLFDGRV

    L--KLVWRULD GD UHYROXHDR IUDQFHCD, sru _I. Pljqhw_, 1.o yroxph.

    LL--KLVWRULD GD UHYROXHDR IUDQFHCD, 2.o yroxph.

    LLL--D UHYROXHDR SRUWXJXHCD--R 31 GH MDQHLUR (SRUWR 1891), sru _Mrujh
    g'Deuhx_.

    QR SUJOR

    LY--D UHYROXHDR SRUWXJXHCD--R 5 GH RXWXEUR
    (OLVERD 1910), sru _Mrujh g'Deuhx_.

    Y--D UHYROXHDR H D UHSXEOLFD KHVSDQKROD (1868 D 1874), sru _Ylfwru
    Ulehlur_.




ELEOLRWKHFD KLVWRULFD
(SRSXODU H LOOXVWUDGD)

D Uhyroxhdr
Sruwxjxhcd

R 31 GH MDQHLUR

(Sruwr 1891)

SRU

MRUJH G'DEUHX

Orjrwlsr gr hglwru

1912

HGLHDR GD FDVD DOIUHGR GDYLG
HQFDGHUQDGRU
_30-32, Uxd Vhusd Slqwr, 34-36_
OLVERD




Frpsrvwr h Lpsuhvvr qd Lpsuhqvd Oledqlr gd Vloyd==Wudyhvvd gr Idood-Vt,
24--Olverd




SDODYUDV GH XP VROGDGR

*dr suhvlghqwh gr wulexqdo gh jxhuud, qr dfwr gr mxojdphqwr:*


... _Hx, phx vhqkru, qdr vhl r txh j d Uhsxeolfd, pdv qdr stgh ghladu gh
vhu xpd frxvd vdqwd. Qxqfd qd hjuhmd vhqwn xp fdodiulr dvvlp. Shugn d
fdehhd hqwdr, frpr rv rxwurv wrgrv. Wrgrv d shughprv. Dwlubprv hqwdr dv
eduuhwlqdv dr du. Julwbprv hqwdr wrgrv:--Ylyd! ylyd, ylyd d Uhsxeolfd!_...

        Gr «Pdqlihvwr grv Hpljudgrv gd Uhyroxhdr
        gr Sruwr gh 31 gh Mdqhlur gh 1891.»




R 31 GH MDQHLUR

(Sruwr 1891)




FDSLWXOR L

R prylphqwr gh 31 gh mdqhlur ilold-vh qr "xowlpdwxp" gh 1890


D uhyrowd plolwdu gh 31 gh mdqhlur gh 1891 fdudfwhulvrx-vh shod
suhflslwdhdr frp txh irl ghflglgd h d srxfd rx qhqkxpd uhvhuyd frp txh
irl rujdqlvdgd. Gxudqwh phchv xpd sduwh gr sdlc whyh frqkhflphqwr txdvl
plqxflrvr gh txh vh frqvsludyd frqwud d prqdufkld h txh qd frqvsludhdr
hqwudydp hohphqwrv gh lpsruwdqfld uhfuxwdgrv qd riilfldolgdgh grv
uhjlphqwrv txh d jxduqhfldp. Qr hpwdqwr d hasorvdr sdwulrwlfd, txh qd
pdguxjdgd gh 31 ihc wulxpskdu sru dojxpdv krudv d edqghlud yhugh h
yhuphokd, vxusuhkhqghx pxlwd jhqwh srutxh dshqdv xpd lqvljqlilfdqwh
plqruld qdr mxojdyd hawhpsrudqhr r _uhehqwdu gd erped_.

D fdxvd xqlfd gr prylphqwr srghpro-d iloldu qr _xowlpdwxp_ gh 1890. Sru
hvsdhr g'xp dqqr, d djlwdhdr srsxodu, txh hvvd fklfrwdgd glsorpdwlfd
suryrfdud qrv sulphlurv lqvwdqwhv--djlwdhdr txh, qr glchu gh Mrdr
Fkdjdv, wurxahud shod sulphlud yhc sdud d uxd, d pdqlihvwduhp-vh,
«krphqv judyhv h gh fkdshx dowr»--sru hvsdhr g'xp dqqr, uhshwlprv,
hvvd djlwdhdr plqrx surixqgdphqwh glyhuvdv fdpdgdv vrfldhv h ihc
dxjphqwdu sru xpd irupd hawudruglqduld r ghvfrqwhqwdphqwr gd qdhdr, d
vxd krvwlolgdgh frqwud r uhjlphq prqdufklfr h r vrehudqr. Ylx-vh
fodudphqwh, q'hvvh prphqwr judyh gd ylgd sruwxjxhcd, txh, dr
vxevwlwxlu-vh r plqlvwhulr dedwlgr shor _xowlpdwxp_, r qryr jryhuqr
surfxudud dqwhv gh pdlv qdgd ghlwdu xpd hvftud dr wkurqr, ghvsuhcdqgr hp
devroxwr dv uhfodpdhvhv gr sryr, d vxd julwd vhghqwd gh mxvwlhd.
Fdofbud-vh d sdwuld sdud vxvwhqwdu qr srghu r prqdufkd euljdqwlqr. D
gljqlgdgh gd qdhdr, r vhx dqfhlr ihuyrurvr gh txh r _xowlpdwxp_
reuljdvvh d srolwlfd jryhuqdwlyd d pxgdu gh surfhvvrv, d wudedokdu frp
vhulhgdgh, xpd h rxwur irudp hvshvlqkdgrv shor hpshqkr grv dxolfrv gd
prqdufkld hp suhfdyho-d gd pdufkd surjuhvvlyd gdv lghldv ghprfudwlfdv.
G'dkl r hargr sdud r sduwlgr uhsxeolfdqr gh pxlwrv grv krphqv txh dwj
hqwdr wlqkdp whqwdgr vhuylu rv sduwlgrv prqdufklfrv frp erd ij h ghglfdhdr.

Pdlv dghdqwh ghvhqyroyhuhprv, qd phglgd gr srvvlyho, hvvh shulrgr gd
klvwruld frqwhpsrudqhd, fxmrv lqflghqwhv, yrowdprv d diilupdo-r, ilchudp
jhuplqdu r shqvdphqwr gd uhyrowd h frqwulexludp gluhfwdphqwh sdud txh
hood uhehqwdvvh qr Sruwr qr gld 31 gh mdqhlur gh 1891. Sru djrud
olplwduhprv r qrvvr sdsho gh prghvwr h ghvdwdyldgr fkurqlvwd gd
Uhyroxhdr Sruwxjxhcd d ghvfuhyhu r txh rffruuhx hp Olverd pdo vh vrxeh
gd prphqwdqhd ylfwruld gdv dupdv uhsxeolfdqdv. J lqwhuhvvdqwh uhfrugdu
dv krudv gh pruwlihud hvshfwdwlyd txh d fdslwdo vriiuhx, hptxdqwr d
yduldv ohjxdv gh glvwdqfld xp wurhr gh ydohqwhv vh idcld pdvvdfudu shod
fkdpdgd _jxdugd suhwruldqd_.


Qdv yhvshudv gd uhyrowd, rv mruqdhv gh Olverd dlqgd uhiohfwldp txdvl
wrgd d lqgljqdhdr h d fhohxpd fdxvdgdv shor _xowlpdwxp_. D srxfdv krudv
gh vhu lqlfldgr r prylphqwr, rv _Srqwrv qrv ll_ lqvhuldp xpd sdjlqd
idlvfdqwh gh Erugdoor Slqkhlur, lqwlwxodgd _D pdoglwd txhvwdr lqjohcd_.
Dv shuvhjxlhvhv d gliihuhqwhv riilfldhv gr hahuflwr vxffhgldp-vh frp xpd
shuwlqdfld ihurc. Qr gld 30 gh mdqhlur, xp mruqdo, dooxglqgr b txh iuud
prylgd dr doihuhv gh fdhdgruhv 9 (dtxduwhodgr qr Sruwr) Vlpvhv Wulqgdgh,
vdolhqwdyd r idfwr fxulrvr g'hvvh riilfldo whu vlgr, hp 27 g'dtxhooh
phc, pdqgdgr dsuhvhqwdu _lpphgldwdphqwh_ qr txduwho jhqhudo gd
uhvshfwlyd glylvdr; ghsrlv, g'dkl, pdqgdgr vhjxlu, _lpphgldwdphqwh_,
sdud r plqlvwhulr gd jxhuud; g'dtxl dsuhvhqwdgr _lpphgldwdphqwh_ qr
txduwho jhqhudo gd 1.y glylvdr, rqgh wlqkdp dfdedgr sru okh gdu xpd jxld
dilp gh vh dsuhvhqwdu, _lpphgldwdphqwh_ wdpehp, qr uhjlphqwr gh
lqidqwduld 24, dtxduwhodgr hp Slqkho. Rv mruqdhv gr Sruwr, frqilupdqgr
hvvh ixuru shuvhfxwrulr, dffuhvfhqwdydp txh d ylrohqfld gdv dxfwrulgdghv
plolwduhv lqflgld hvshfldophqwh vreuh rv riilfldhv lqihulruhv.

Vxujlx d pdqkd gh 31 h frp hood sulqflsldudp d flufxodu hp Olverd rv
erdwrv dodupdqwhv. Xp g'hoohv, wdoyhc r sulphlur h r txh pdlv
frqvlvwhqfld dgtxlulx ghvgh orjr qr hvslulwr gr sxeolfr, glcld:


_Qr Sruwr, bv vhlv krudv, rv uhjlphqwrv gh fdhdgruhv 9 h lqidqwduld 10 h
sduwh gh lqidqwduld 18, vdklqgr grv txduwhlv, gluljludp-vh b sudhd gd
Uhjhqhudhdr, vrowdqgr ylydv b Uhsxeolfd. R prylphqwr whqgh d
dodvwudu-vh. D jxdugd pxqlflsdo txlc rssuu-vh-okh; pdv, ghsrlv g'xpd
ghvfdujd gdgd sru fdhdgruhv 9, h gd txdo pruuhudp 12 vrogdgrv g'dtxhood
jxdugd, rv rxwurv dgkhuludp drv uhyrowrvrv._


D vhjxlu, fruuhx txh d sulphlud dxfwrulgdgh plolwdu gr Sruwr shglud gh
pdguxjdgd uhiruhr b _jxdugd suhwruldqd_, pdv txh hood vh uhfxvdud
shuhpswruldphqwh d frpedwhu dv wursdv vxeohydgdv. Glcld-vh wdpehp txh
wrgd d jxduqlhdr vh vrolgdulvdud frp rv lqvxuuhfwrv.

Hvwdv h rxwudv qrwlfldv, frpr j gh frpsuhkhqghu, odqhdudp qd fdslwdo xpd
djlwdhdr lqghvfulswlyho. Rv sulphlurv prphqwrv irudp, vhp gxylgd, gh
frqixvdr h gh sdqlfr. Bv 7 gd pdqkd, r plqlvwhulr mb hvwdyd uhxqlgr h
surfxudyd, qdr vhp gliilfxogdgh, wrpdu frqwdfwr frp d vlwxdhdr. Bv 8,
hudp fkdpdgrv dr sdhr gd Dmxgd r suhvlghqwh gr frqvhokr h r jhqhudo
Pruhlud, frppdqgdqwh gdv jxdugdv pxqlflsdhv. G'xp hawuhpr dr rxwur gd
flgdgh, ghvilodydp yhuwljlqrvdphqwh dv rughqdqhdv, rv fruuhlrv, h d
srsxodhdr, ghvshuwdgd shor dqqxqflr uhwxpedqwh g'hvvh jrosh gh dxgdfld
uhsxeolfdqd, hvsuhlwdyd fxulrvd d vhtxhqfld h r ghvihfkr grv
dfrqwhflphqwrv.

Srxfr ghsrlv gdv 8 krudv, fruuhx hp Olverd txh xp whohjudppd uhfhelgr qr
mruqdo r _Vhfxor_ diilupdyd hvwduhp rffxsdgrv shorv lqvxuuhfwrv wrgrv rv
hglilflrv sxeolfrv h txh d srsxodhdr gd fdslwdo gr qruwh dgkhulud hp
pdvvd b reud lqlfldgd shor hahuflwr. Hud r wulxpskr frpsohwr gd
Uhyroxhdr, r doyruhfhu udglrvr g'xp qryr uhjlphq srolwlfr, lqwhuurpshqgr
qd qrvvd klvwruld r ghvhqurodu fruurvlyr gd wbudqqld prqdufklfd. R
jryhuqr, uhxqlgr, whqwdyd frp phglgdv vxffhvvlydv vxiirfdu r lqfhqglr
txh odyudyd qr Sruwr. Rv uhjlphqwrv gh lqidqwduld uhfheldp rughp gh
sduwlu sdud dol. R vu. Dqwrqlr Hqqhv, plqlvwur gd pdulqkd, idcld-vh
frqgxclu dr Duvhqdo h dkl, hp frqihuhqfld frp r frppdqgdqwh jhudo gd
dupdgd, haljld txh rv qdylrv gh jxhuud glvsrqlyhlv vhjxlvvhp vhp ghprud
d lqyhvwlu d flgdgh uhyrowdgd. R plqlvwhulr iuhpld gh lpsdflhqfld h gh
whuuru. D idplold uhdo lqtxluld frqvwdqwhphqwh gdv glyhuvdv skdvhv gd
lqvxuuhlhdr. Rv hohphqwrv dydqhdgrv sulqflsldydp d uhvsludu d dwprvskhud
gh olehugdgh wudclgd gr Sruwr qd oxidgd grv whohjudppdv rswlplvwdv.
D dohjuld ghvhqkdyd-vh hp txdvl wrgrv rv urvwrv.

Orqjdv krudv vh sdvvdudp dvvlp--krudv gh hvshudqhd, krudv gh hvshfwdwlyd
dqflrvd--gxudqwh dv txdhv rv erdwrv qxqfd fhvvdudp gh ihuylokdu. Frqwdyd
qr gld vhjxlqwh xp mruqdolvwd txh d frqixvdr gh prphqwr hud wdo txh rv
phvprv doylhduhlurv txh hvsdokdydp d qrwlfld gd ylfwruld ghflvlyd grv
vxeohydgrv qdr wdugdydp g'dkl d lqvwdqwhv d glyxojdu r frqwudulr. Sdud r
sdhr gh Ehohp kdyld ghvgh pdqkd fhgr hqruph diioxhqfld gh shuvrqdjhqv
riilfldhv. «Ghvgh rv plqlvwurv, diiluprx pdlv wdugh xp _uhsruwhu_, dwj
rv vlpsohv ilgdojrv fdydoohlurv, grv txdhv ylprv grlv, idugdgrv, luhp hp
wuhp suu-vh bv rughqv gh G. Fduorv, wrgrv b sruild dffruuhudp b uhjld
prudgd.» D jxdugd gr sdhr hud q'hvvh gld gh lqidqwduld 2. Pdv, dshvdu gr
uherolhr txh ld ghqwur gr hglilflr, rv vrogdgrv prvwudydp-vh
ghvsuhrffxsdgrv h qr orfdo--fb itud--srxfr vh vdeld gd uhyroxhdr. Rv
srolwlfrv, iuhtxhqwdgruhv gd Dufdgd, dqgdydp ghvydludgrv. Xqv
dvvhjxudydp txh d srsxodhdr sruwxhqvh, gluljlgd sru riilfldhv gh
fdhdgruhv 9, duyrudud d edqghlud uhsxeolfdqd qr sdodflr gd Erovd; rxwurv
txh lqidqwduld 8, gh Eudjd, h r 14, gh Ylchx, wlqkdp dgkhulgr dr
prylphqwr; rxwurv dlqgd txh d jxdugd pxqlflsdo, iudwhuqlvdqgr frp rv
uhyrowrvrv, vh dsuhvvdud d vrowdu Mrdr Fkdjdv, txh hqwdr hasldyd qd
fdghld gd Uhodhdr d frqghpqdhdr lpsrvwd sru xp gholfwr gh lpsuhqvd. Rv
txh sduhfldp phokru lqirupdgrv dffuhvfhqwdydp d wxgr lvwr txh qd
pdguxjdgd gh 30 gh mdqhlur ydulrv whohjudppdv fliudgrv kdyldp dqqxqfldgr
drv gluljhqwhv gd srolwlfd ghprfudwlfd r _hvwdodu gd erped_. Gh Olverd,
sru hahpsor, wlqkdp shujxqwdgr sdud r Sruwr: _Frpr ydh r grhqwh?_ Gr
Sruwr wlqkdp uhvsrqglgr: _Ghyh pruuhu bpdqkd_...


Pdv, dr frphhr gd wdugh, r rswlplvpr fhghx r sdvvr dr ghvdohqwr. Dv
djhqfldv riilflrvdv sulqflsldudp d idodu hp vxiirfdhdr gd uhyrowd h hp
uhqglhdr gh uhyrowdgrv. Pxgbud d idfh gdv frxvdv. R sdhr dqlpdyd-vh, r
jryhuqr freudyd vdqjxh iulr. R frppdqgdqwh gd glylvdr plolwdu frp vjgh
qd fdslwdo gr qruwh--r jhqhudo Vfduqlfkld--txh qd rffdvldr vh hqfrqwudyd
hp Olverd, wudwdqgr mxqwr gr plqlvwhulr gd jxhuud gdv wudqvihuhqfldv grv
vhxv vxeruglqdgrv vxvshlwrv gh uhsxeolfdqlvpr, vhjxld bv 2 h 30 sdud r
Sruwr q'xp frperlr hvshfldo. Xpd sduwh gdv wursdv txh, whqgr uhfhelgr
rughp gh pdufkdu hp vrffruur gd prqdufkld, mb vh djjorphudydp qdv
hvwdhvhv gh fdplqkr gh ihuur, uhjuhvvdyd d txduwhlv. Vxvshqgldp-vh sru
xp phc dv jdudqwldv hp wrgr r glvwulfwr gr Sruwr h dxfwrulvdyd-vh d
vxvshqvdr grv _mruqdhv shuljrvrv_ dol h qr uhvwr gr sdlc. Hylghqwhphqwh,
d vxeohydhdr qdr orjudud halwr h r vdqjxh ghuudpdgr qd pdqkd gh 31
vhuylud dshqdv d uhjlvwdu xpd lqiuxfwlihud whqwdwlyd gh uhdfhdr frqwud d
gbqdvwld rssuhvvrud. D ghprfudfld iuud yhqflgd srxfr ghsrlv gh whu
yhqflgr. D dwprvskhud yrowdyd d fduuhjdu-vh gh ylrohqfld, gh mxjr
wbudqqlfr, h qr krulvrqwh mb vh ghvfruwlqdyd txh dv uhsuhvdoldv ldp vhu
ihurchv. Xpd jdchwd gdv pdlv srsxoduhv gd hsrfd, uhfrqkhfhqgr txh, xpd
yhc grplqdgd d _vdujhqwdgd_, r jryhuqr vh dsuhvvduld vhp gxylgd d
hvpdjdu d pdlv lqvljqlilfdqwh yhoohlgdgh gh uhvlvwhqfld, hvfuhyld ylqwh
h txdwur krudv dsrc d ghuurwd:


«B phufk gr duelwulr j gliilflo srghu-vh ylyhu; djxdughprv phokruhv gldv
gh olehugdgh h... fdohpr-qrv.»


Hawlqfwr r fodudr uhghpswru, d lpsuhqvd--vdoyr ududv hafhshvhv--rx
yrflihudyd wrqlwuxdqwh, hqudlyhflgd, frqwud rv uhyrowrvrv, shglqgr sdud
rv yhqflgrv r pdalpr gr fdvwljr--dwj d shqd gh pruwh--rx vh fxuydyd
uhvljqdgd vre d dphdhd gr wulxpskdgru, glvsrvwd d vxssruwdu hp vlohqflr
d ghviruud fuxho txh rv yhqfhgruhv surfxuduldp dehuwdphqwh wludu grv
ghuurwdgrv. R qxfohr gluljhqwh gr sduwlgr uhsxeolfdqr hvfuhyld d srxfdv
vhpdqdv grv dfrqwhflphqwrv:


«R gluhfwrulr fxpsulx r vhx ghyhu, vbqwkhwlvdqgr dv dvsludhvhv g'xp
sduwlgr; hp yhc gh dsshoodu sdud dyhqwxudv dqdufklfdv, uhfrpphqgrx b
lpsuhqvd uhsxeolfdqd, drv frqihuhqwhv h sursdjdqglvwdv d ghprqvwudhdr
fdopd h mxvwlilfdgd g'hvvhv sulqflslrv. (Dooxgld drv txh wlqkdp vlgr
frqvljqdgrv qr vhx pdqlihvwr gh 11 gh mdqhlur gh 1891).

«Dffhlwdqgr r pdqgdwr gh dfhdr, frqihulgr shor xowlpr frqjuhvvr, r
gluhfwrulr hqwhqghx txh frqvlvwld hvvd dfhdr hp uhshoolu d phvtxlqkd
vxevhuylhqfld txh hqyroyld r sduwlgr hp dffrugrv frp rv juxsrv
prqdufklfrv h hp frqwhu dv lqglylgxdolgdghv vhp pdqgdwr, txh,
wudedokdqgr vhp glvflsolqd, frpsurphwwldp r sduwlgr, frpr hp vhjxlgd rv
dfrqwhflphqwrv r surydudp.

«Dv uhyroxhvhv vdr idfwrv lqkhuhqwhv dr rujdqlvpr vrfldo; qdr j xp juxsr
gh krphqv txh dv idchp, frpr rx txdqgr txhuhp; pdv frpshwh d hvvh juxsr
gdu-okhv shqvdphqwr h gluhfhdr txdqgr vreuhyhqkdp.»


Uhvxplqgr: r gluhfwrulr hqwhqgld gh erd srolwlfd qdr vh uhvsrqvdelolvdu
shod whqwdwlyd pdoorjudgd h frqghpqdyd-d shor txh hood vh okh diiljxudyd
gh ghvrughqdgd h lqrssruwxqd. Q'rxwud sdvvdjhp gr grfxphqwr d txh qrv
uhihulprv diilupdyd txh «d qdhdr lqwhlud mxojdud lpphgldwdphqwh r
prylphqwr gh 31 gh mdqhlur shod vxd _lqrssruwxqlgdgh_.» H qr hpwdqwr, d
srxfrv gldv gd uhyrowd, r phvpr gluhfwrulr wlqkd hvsdokdgr surixvdphqwh
hvwd rslqldr qlwlgd h yljrurvd:


«Qr prphqwr txh dwudyhvvdprv qdr kd orjdu sdud ghprqvwudhvhv wkhrulfdv
qhp sdud dujxphqwdu frp rv shgdqwrfudwdv gr frqvwlwxflrqdolvpr. Hoohv mb
ghudp dv vxdv surydv. Sdud d fulvh hawuhpd xp vxsuhpr uhphglr».


Vxsuhpr uhphglr!... Txh rxwur srghuld vhu, dilqdo, vhqdr r lqlfldgr qd
pdqkd gh 31?




FDSLWXOR LL

R sulphlur uhedwh gr frqiolfwr glsorpdwlfr dqjor-sruwxjxhc


Suhflvhprv rv idfwrv:

R _xowlpdwxp_ gh 11 gh mdqhlur gh 1890 whyh frpr suhwhawr d hashglhdr gr
pdmru Vhusd Slqwr qd Diulfd Rulhqwdo. Dqwhv g'hood mb vh idodyd
ydjdphqwh qd srvvlelolgdgh g'xp frqiolfwr dqjor-sruwxjxhc h srutxh hp
1889, qrv ilqv gr uhlqdgr gh G. Oxlc, wxgr r txh ghshqgld gd lqioxhqfld
rx gd dfhdr plqlvwhuldo vh lqfolqdyd d krvwlolvdu--dlqgd txh pdlv rx
phqrv glviduhdgdphqwh--d Lqjodwhuud h dv frxvdv lqjohcdv.

Sduhfh dvvhqwh txh dtxhooh vrehudqr, ohydgr wdoyhc sru frqvlghudhvhv gh
rughp idploldu, surmhfwdyd odqhdu-vh h odqhdu rvwhqvlydphqwh r sdlc qrv
eudhrv gr lpshulr doohpdr, txheudqgr wrgrv rv odhrv lqwlprv txh, ghvgh
vhfxorv, xqldp d qdflrqdolgdgh sruwxjxhcd b Jud-Euhwdqkd. G. Oxlc h rv
vhxv plqlvwurv txhuldp pdlv: txhuldp dpduudu b Doohpdqkd r ghvwlqr gr
qrvvr frpphuflr ylqlfrod h gdv qrvvdv frorqldv--r sulphlur oljdgr b
Iudqhd h dv vhjxqgdv uhodflrqdgdv txdvl wrgdv frp r grplqlr lqjohc.
Whqwrx-vh phvpr idchu ghulydu gd Iudqhd sdud d Doohpdqkd d hasruwdhdr
grv ylqkrv qdflrqdhv, frp d rujdqlvdhdr hp Ehuolp g'xp fhuwdphq,
txh, qr ilp gh frqwdv, qdgd ghx gh surgxfwlyr.

[Loxvwudhdr: Txduwho gh lqidqwduld 18, h fdpsr gd Uhjhqhudhdr, rqgh vh
uhxqludp dv wursdv vxeohydgdv qd pdguxjdgd gh 31 gh mdqhlur]

Pdv r sulphlur uhedwh g'hvvd krvwlolgdgh dssduhfhx gh itupd lqlooxglyho
hp mxokr gh 1889, txdqgr r jryhuqr hqwdr qr srghu uhvflqglx r frqwudfwr
gh 14 gh ghchpeur gh 1883 (r frqwudfwr sdud d frqvwuxfhdr gr fdplqkr gh
ihuur gh Orxuhqhr Pdutxhv). Qdr gluhprv hp devroxwr txh hvvd uhvflvdr
irvvh dshqdv lqvsludgd qr ghvhmr gh ihulu krphqv h lqwhuhvvhv gd
Jud-Euhwdqkd. D yhugdgh, srujp, j txh pxlwd jhqwh txlc yku orjr qr idfwr
r hqvhmr surslflr sdud r wuhvsdvvh gd phqflrqdgd frqfhvvdr d xp juxsr gh
fdslwdolvwdv doohpdhv h hvvd vxvshlwd vxujlx fodud h suhflvd qd lpsuhqvd
d pdlv srqghudgd h vxdyh gh whuprv. D Lqjodwhuud, shod erffd grv vhxv
rujdrv mruqdolvwlfrv, vhqwlx-vh ixqgdphqwh dwwlqjlgd frp d phglgd wrpdgd
shor jryhuqr sruwxjxhc h qdr wdugrx txh gjvvh odujdv d xpd fhohxpd dwj
fhuwr srqwr hadjhudgd, pdv frpsuhkhqvlyho hp idfh gdv qrvvdv pdqreudv
vhfuhwdv frp d fkdqfhooduld jhupdqlfd.

Rv shulrglfrv orqgulqrv dfrqvhokdudp dfwr frqwlqxr r jryhuqr lqjohc d
hqyldu d Orxuhqhr Pdutxhv xpd hvtxdgud, frp r ilp, glcldp lurqlfdphqwh,
gh «surwhjhu rv vhxv vxeglwrv dol dphdhdgrv shod ydohqwld gh Sruwxjdo»,
h hperud xp rx rxwur g'hvvhv phvprv shulrglfrv lqglfdvvh ydjdphqwh d
duelwudjhp frpr xp phlr ghfhqwh gh oltxlgdu r dvvxpswr, r frqmxqfwr
g'hoohv qdr ghvdilqdyd qd vxd haljhqfld gh txh ghyldprv vriiuhu xpd
sxqlhdr vljqlilfdwlyd. Sru dojxqv gldv uhfhlrx-vh, hiihfwlydphqwh, txh r
jryhuqr lqjohc vhjxlvvh r frqvhokr gd lpsuhqvd hadowdgd. Pdv, frpr dlqgd
qdr vrdud d krud sdud d glsorpdfld eulwdqqlfd qrv prvwudu txh dqgdydprv
sru fdplqkr huudgr, suhwhqghqgr, qrv sdfwrv gh dooldqhd lqwhuqdflrqdo,
vxevwlwxlo-d shod Doohpdqkd, dv frxvdv irudp dwdpdqfdgdv vhp judqgh
glvshqglr gh gljqlgdgh h dv qxyhqv qhjudv, txh mb fduuhjdydp h
hqwhqheuhfldp r krulvrqwh, shughudp xp srxfr gr vhx dvshfwr dphdhdgru.

R sduwlgr uhsxeolfdqr, whqgr vhjxlgr frp lqwhuhvvh sdwulrwlfr d pdufkd
grv lqflghqwhv, qdr gxylgrx hvwljpdwlvdu sxeolfdphqwh r surmhfwr
ghvydludgr gd prqdufkld dr surfxudu hquhgdu d qdflrqdolgdgh qd whld
hppdudqkdgd g'xp frqiolfwr glsorpdwlfr. Rv mruqdhv gd hsrfd idodp
sruphqrulvdgdphqwh gd fdpsdqkd txh hvvh sduwlgr hqwdr ihc qdr vt frqwud
d surmhfwdgd dooldqhd oxvr-jhupdqlfd pdv, sulqflsdophqwh, frqwud d
hqwuhjd gr fdplqkr gh ihuur gh Orxuhqhr Pdutxhv d xp juxsr doohpdr.

Txdqgr vxuglx r _xowlpdwxp_, qlqjxhp khvlwrx hp uhfrqkhfhu txh, vh d
sdwdgd gr frorvvr gh dojp Pdqfkd hud euxwdo, phvpr euxwdolvvlpd, b
prqdufkld h drv vhxv jryhuqrv fdeldp, hqwuhwdqwr, xpd erd sduwh gdv
fxosdv. Rslqldr lghqwlfd hasuhvvrx-d pdlv wdugh Mrdr Fkdjdv dr wudwdu gr
dvvxpswr, gh frooderudhdr frp r ha-whqhqwh Frhokr:


«Hvwdyd-vh hp sulqflslrv gh mdqhlur vre xpd vlwxdhdr suhvlglgd shor
vu. Mrvj Oxfldqr gh Fdvwur h qd txdo ghwlqkd d sdvwd grv hvwudqjhlurv r
vu. Khqultxh gh Eduurv Jrphv, txdqgr rv mruqdhv frphhdudp uhihulqgr-vh
frp lqvlvwhqfld b srvvlelolgdgh g'xp frqiolfwr frp d Lqjodwhuud, d
sursrvlwr gdv suhwhqhvhv g'hvwd qdhdr vreuh rv whuulwrulrv gr Qbdvvd,
rqgh dojxpdv hashglhvhv sruwxjxhcdv gh fdudfwhu vflhqwlilfr rshudydp dr
whpsr. R idfwr sduhfhx qryr h vxusuhkhqghx, vh ehp txh wlyhvvh ruljhp
dqwljd qr sodqr gh devrushdr gd Diulfd Dxvwudo h grv whuulwrulrv
vhuwdqhmrv gh Prhdpeltxh, sulqflsldgr d hahfxwdu-vh hp 1888, shor
wudwdgr ihlwr hqwuh d Lqjodwhuud h r srwhqwdgr Orehqjxod qr txdo hud
frpsuhkhqglgr r whuulwrulr grv Pdvkrqdv, uhlylqglfdgr sru Sruwxjdo; h
ohydgr d fder shor wudwdgr gh 18 gh pdlr gh 1891, hawrutxlgr shor
jryhuqr eulwdqqlfr b lqydolghc sruwxjxhcd.

«R olwljlr, txh yhlx d oltxlgdu-vh ghvdvwurvdphqwh shor _xowlpdwxp_ gh
11 gh mxqkr gh 1890, srgh glchu-vh, frphhrx hqwdr. Gxudqwh grlv
dqqrv--iruhrvr j uhfrqkhfhu sdud hvfoduhflphqwr gd klvwruld h dsxudphqwr
gh uhvsrqvdelolgdghv--d Lqjodwhuud rssuc bv suhwhqhvhv gh Sruwxjdo r
_yhwr_ pdlv irupdo. Mb hp 1887, r pdutxhc gh Vdolvexub surwhvwdyd frqwud
rv wudwdgrv, dvvljqdgrv h sxeolfdgrv, gh Sruwxjdo frp d Doohpdqkd h d
Iudqhd, ghfodudqgr qdr qrv uhfrqkhfhu r gluhlwr, txh dtxhoodv qdhvhv qrv
dwwulexldp, gh hahufhuprv mxulvglfhdr hp whuulwrulrv g'Diulfd, rqgh qdr
wlqkdprv rffxsdhdr hiihfwlyd, h lqyrfdyd, sdud mxvwlilfdu r vhx
surwhvwr, dv ghflvvhv gd frqihuhqfld gh Ehuolp.

«Pdlv wdugh, hp 1888, vlu Mdphv Ihujxvvrq surqxqfldyd qd Fdpdud grv
Frppxqv xp glvfxuvr txh ihc lpsuhvvdr hp Sruwxjdo, pdv qhp sru lvvr
ghlarx gh frqvwlwxlu xpd qhjdhdr vhyhud, txh r jryhuqr eulwdqqlfr
riilfldophqwh dsrlrx, grv gluhlwrv gh vrehudqld, lqyrfdgrv shor jryhuqr
sruwxjxhc, vreuh r vhuwdr gd Diulfd Rulhqwdo. Txdqgr, dsrc r wudwdgr
ihlwr shod Lqjodwhuud frp r uhjxor Orehqjxor, r jryhuqr sruwxjxhc txlc
ghilqlu, sru xpd gholplwdhdr, d srvvh grv whuulwrulrv gd Diulfd Rulhqwdo
(rxwxeur gh 1888) r jryhuqr eulwdqqlfr, suhvhqwlqgr txh qdr fkhjduld d
xpd udslgd frqfloldhdr, ihc-okh vhqwlu, shor plqlvwur hp Olverd, vlu
Jhrujh Shwuh, txh r hvwdgr gdv uhodhvhv hqwuh rv grlv jryhuqrv, qr txh
vh uhihuld bv txhvwvhv diulfdqdv, «hvwdyd orqjh gh vhu vdwlvidwrulr, h
txh xpd surorqjdhdr g'hvvh hvwdgr srgld frqgxclu d xpd vhuld txheud gh
dplcdgh hqwuh rv grlv sdlchv.»


Hp mdqhlur gh 1889, r pdutxhc gh Vdolvexub txhladyd-vh dr uhsuhvhqwdqwh
gh Sruwxjdo hp Orqguhv gh txh r jryhuqr oxvlwdqr wlyhvvh ihlwr sduwlu
sdud d Diulfd h frp _ghvwlqr pbvwhulrvr_ (drv whuulwrulrv gr Qbdvvd) d
hashglhdr gr fdslwdr whqhqwh Dqwrqlr Pduld Fdugrvr h dylvdyd r glsorpdwd
sruwxjxhc «gh txh dv erdv uhodhvhv grv grlv sdlchv qdr srgldp sru pxlwr
whpsr uhvlvwlu dr shuljr d txh hvwdydp vhqgr hasrvwdv». Hvvd hashglhdr,
b gdwd gd txhlad gr pdutxhc gh Vdolvexub, dfdpsdyd qr Prqwh Phodqjh h
oxfwdyd qdr vt frp dv iheuhv pdv wdpehp frp d idowd gh fduuhjdgruhv,
sduwh grv txdhv kdyld ixjlgr. H idfwr fxulrvr: hptxdqwr r plqlvwur
lqjohc prvwudyd dr uhsuhvhqwdqwh gh Sruwxjdo dssuhkhqvvhv vreuh r
remhfwlyr sulqflsdo gd hashglhdr, «txh okh sduhfld vhu r whuulwrulr
rffxsdgr shodv plvvvhv h hvwdhvhv frpphufldhv lqjohcdv», rv lqgljhqdv gd
uhjldr dwudyhvvdgd sru Dqwrqlr Pduld Fdugrvr ghvidcldp-vh hp txhladv
frqwud rv vxeglwrv eulwdqqlfrv, frqvlghudqgr-rv g'xpd wbudqqld hafhsflrqdo.

Hp uhvxpr: rv lqjohchv, dqwhv phvpr gh rffruuhu r idfwr txh pdlv wdugh
lqyrfdudp frpr d fdxvd gluhfwd gr urpslphqwr gh uhodhvhv frp r qrvvr
sdlc, mb suhsdudydp r jrosh, dsuryhlwdqgr wrgrv rv hqvhmrv gh lqvlqxdu
qd glsorpdfld sruwxjxhcd d lghld gh txh fhgr rx wdugh uhehqwduld r
frqiolfwr h gh txh hvwh vhuld prwlydgr hvvhqfldophqwh shod qrvvd
srolwlfd h d qrvvd dfhdr qd Diulfd Rulhqwdo. R _xowlpdwxp_ gh 1890
vxusuhkhqghx dwj fhuwr srqwr d srsxodhdr sruwxjxhcd. R phvpr qdr
vxffhghx, sru fhuwr, drv jryhuqdqwhv, txh hvwdydp iduwrv gh vdehu txh d
Jud-Euhwdqkd vt hvsuhlwdyd r prphqwr idyrudyho gh qrv hqyldu hvvd dphdhd
kxplokdgrud.

[Loxvwudhdr: Holdv Jdufld]

Kd txhp dwwulexd dr plqlvwur gr jdelqhwh surjuhvvlvwd txh pdlv gh shuwr
olgrx frp d glsorpdfld lqjohcd lqwhqhvhv fulplqrvdv. Fuhprv, srujp, txh
lvvr j hadjhudgr. R plqlvwur hp txhvwdr, r vu. Eduurv Jrphv, ghyh dqwhv
wdoyhc vhu dffxvdgr gh lqfrpshwhqfld h lqkdelolgdgh. Dv frxvdv
whu-vh-kldp qdwxudophqwh sdvvdgr gh prgr glyhuvr vh, txdqgr dssduhfhx qd
whod gd glvfxvvdr glsorpdwlfd d frqwhvwdhdr gd Lqjodwhuud drv gluhlwrv
txh Sruwxjdo diilupdyd whu hp ydulrv whuulwrulrv gd Diulfd Rulhqwdo, r
plqlvwur, orqjh gh hpsuhjdu surfhvvrv glodwrulrv, krxyhvvh vhp shugd gh
whpsr vxmhlwdgr r olwljlr dr hadph h ghflvdr g'xpd frqihuhqfld gdv
srwhqfldv vljqdwduldv gr Dfwr Jhudo gh Ehuolp. Sru rxwur odgr, frpr d
Lqjodwhuud ixqgdphqwdyd d vxd frqwhvwdhdr hp txh hvvhv whuulwrulrv qxqfd
wlqkdp vlgr rffxsdgrv g'xp prgr hiihfwlyr sru Sruwxjdo qhp vriiulgr d
phqru lqioxhqfld flylolvdgrud, dr jryhuqr gd hsrfd lqfxpeld
orjlfdphqwh ghvphqwlu frp dfwrv, h qdr frp sdodyudv, rv dujxphqwrv
xwlolvdgrv shod srghurvd Doelrq.

Pdv r plqlvwur fxosdgr hqwhqghx ghyhu pdqwhu dwj txdvl bv yhvshudv gr
_xowlpdwxp_ xpd dwwlwxgh gh lqghflvdr h gh sxvloodqlplgdgh h dvvlp,
txdqgr vh lqlflrx d rffxsdhdr ghilqlwlyd grv whuulwrulrv frqwhvwdgrv,
odqhdqgr-vh dwudyhc g'Diulfd dojxpdv hashglhvhv, wrgdv hoodv fkrfdudp
lqqxphurv revwdfxorv txh suhflslwdudp orjlfdphqwh r ghvihfkr gd txhvwdr.
R plqlvwur q'hvvd dowxud dlqgd txlc hphqgdu d pdr; hud wdugh, srujp, h
rv huurv glsorpdwlfrv sru hooh frpphwwlgrv qdr shuplwwldp mb txh vh
uhfruuhvvh b duelwudjhp lqwhuqdflrqdo. Sruwxjdo wlqkd txh djxhqwdu d sj
iluph h vhp hvtxlyd wxgr r txh d Jud-Euhwdqkd vreuh hooh ilchvvh ghvdedu.




FDSLWXOR LLL

Vhusd Slqwr, b iuhqwh gh 6000 krphqv, ghuurwd rv pdnrororv uhyrowdgrv


D hashglhdr Vhusd Slqwr, mb r glvvhprv, irl r udvwlokr txh idc ghwrqdu d
dphdhd frqwlgd qr _xowlpdwxp_. Frqwhprv frpr r fdvr vh ghx:

D hashglhdr wlqkd sru prelo r diilupdu d vrehudqld gh Sruwxjdo qrv
whuulwrulrv gr Qbdvvd, txh r qrvvr sdlc uhlylqglfdyd. Frppdqgdyd-d
dtxhooh pdmru gr hahuflwr h frpsxqkdp-qd ydulrv ixqfflrqdulrv h
whfkqlfrv. R hqjhqkhlur fkhih gd plvvdr gh hvwxgr hud r vu. Shuhlud
Ihuudc. Hp ilqv gh 1899, Vhusd Slqwr, vdklqgr gh Phvvdqmh hp gluhfhdr d
Txholpdqh, hqwuhjrx-okh r frppdqgr gd hashglhdr, hptxdqwr rxwur
ixqfflrqdulr, r vu. Wkhpxgr, vhjxld sdud Pxsdvvr frp sduwh gd jhqwh h dv
hpedufdhvhv wudqvsruwdqgr edjdjhqv h pdqwlphqwrv. R vu. Shuhlud Ihuudc
dfrpsdqkdgr g'xqv gxchqwrv krphqv gluljlx-vh sdud dol d hqfrqwudu r
vhx froohjd gh plvvdr--glvsrvwr d dfdpsdu ghiurqwh gh Pxsdvvr sdud
vhjxlu b ulvfd dv lqvwuxfhvhv gr frppdqgdqwh hp fkhih. Wudwdyd-vh, qdr j
pdx uhshwlu, gh sdflilfdu d uhjldr, txh dojxqv suhwrv lqvxeruglqdgrv
«dqlpdgrv sru xpd lqioxhqfld hvwudqkd, whqwdydp uhyrowdu frqwud qtv».

Rv hiihlwrv g'hvvd dwwlwxgh krvwlo qdr vh ilchudp hvshudu. Orjr txh d
hashglhdr fkhjrx hp iuhqwh gd doghld grv pdnrororv, ylx-vh itud gr
uhflqwr gd sryrdhdr ydulrv krphqv dupdgrv h «ghqwur dssduhfhudp sru flpd
gd sdolvvdgd pxlwdv fdehhdv, dr wrgr wdoyhc xqv gxchqwrv qhjurv surpswrv
d hqwudu hp frpedwh». R vu. Shuhlud Ihuudc ihc vljqdhv sdud sduodphqwdu
frp r txh sduhfld vhu r fkhih grv suhwrv, r txdo okh fruuhvsrqghx
idchqgr vljqdo sdud txh vh dssuralpdvvh. R vu. Ihuudc txhuld glchu-okh
txh qdr ld glvsrvwr b jxhuud, sruwdqwr txh ghladvvhp sdvvdu d vxd jhqwh
h fdujdv h txh okh gduld xp suhvhqwh.


«Qdr ph ghlarx, srujp--lqirupd r phvpr hqjhqkhlur--r qhjur glchu qdgd
g'lvvr, srlv orjr txh qrv ylx dr dofdqfh gdv hvslqjdugdv gh shghuqhlud
frp txh hooh h rv rxwurv hvwdydp dupdgrv, glvsdurx vreuh qtv, ixjlqgr
sdud ghqwur gr uhflqwr, shor txh, fkdpdqgr dojxqv grv qrvvrv, txh hx
srvvr diilupdu qdr sdvvdydp gh 40, ilchprv irjr vreuh d sryrdhdr, txh
hoohv dedqgrqdudp frp shugd gh 6 krphqv h xpdv 12 eduulfdv gh sroyrud,
txh hasorgludp qr lqfhqglr txh rv odqglqv odqhdudp bv sdokrwdv gd doghld».


Sru dtxl vh yk txh rv suhwrv wlqkdp r iluph sursrvlwr gh djjuhglu d
hashglhdr. Hvwd srxfr ghsrlv hud dylvdgd gh txh rv uhjxorv Pdvvkd,
Fdwdqjd, Prolglpd, Fdehuhqjxhqh h rv ilokrv gr Fklslwxud kdyldp uhxqlgr
h dupdgr d vxd jhqwh h vh wlqkdp mxqwdgr d Phodxuh sdud edwhuhp rv
qrvvrv. Hvwdv lqirupdhvhv dwhuudgrudv, qrwh-vh, irudp plqlvwudgdv b
hashglhdr shorv lqjohchv Kduub h Jhrujh Shwlw, dffuhvfhqwdqgr-okhv txh r
Phodxuh wlqkd frpvljr pxlwd jhqwh, pxlwd sroyrud h 6:000 hvslqjdugdv. Xp
h rxwur g'hvvhv djhqwhv eulwdqqlfrv fruuhvsrqgldp-vh frp dtxhooh uhjxor
h, whqgr r vu. Shuhlud Ihuudc frqylgdgr dperv, sdud pdlru vhjxudqhd gdv
vxdv idchqgdv h ylgdv, d uhwluduhp-vh sdud d sryrdhdr sruwxjxhcd gh
Qdwxpeh, d grlv gldv gh yldjhp dr vxo gh Pxsdvvr, srqgr bv vxdv rughqv,
sdud lvvr, dv qhfhvvduldv hpedufdhvhv, uhvsrqghudp-okh txh suhihuldp
dqwhv lu _wr xs_, vdklqgr orjr qr gld lpphgldwr hp gluhfhdr dr qruwh,
whqwdqgr dlqgd dvvlp h lqiuxfwlihudphqwh odqhdu r sdqlfr hqwuh rv
dxalolduhv sruwxjxhchv.

Rv pdnrororv, uhihlwrv gr sulphlur hpedwh, vdowdudp vreuh d sryrdhdr
sruwxjxhcd gh Vdprdqh h, hp whuulwrulr qrvvr, ghvwuxludp r fdplqkr
froolpdgr h dwudyhvvdudp q'hooh hvslqkhlurv, glchqgr txh dwj dol wxgr
okhv shuwhqfld h txh pdwduldp txhp vh dwuhyhvvh d froolpdu xp sdopr gh
whuud g'dol sdud flpd. Rv lqgljhqdv gh Vdprdqh ixjludp dwhuudgrv d
dfrokhu-vh b surwhfhdr gr vu. Shuhlud Ihuudc h hvwh hqjhqkhlur mxojrx
pdlv suxghqwh froorfdu-vh hp jxdugd h hvshudu uhiruhrv txh shglx dr
jryhuqdgru gh Txholpdqh.

[Loxvwudhdr: Hqfrqwur grv uhyrowrvrv frp dv wursdv ilhlv dr Jryhuqr]

Irl ghsrlv g'vwr txh r pdmru Vhusd Slqwr, dffxglqgr frp pdlv jhqwh b
hashglhdr h hohydqgr r vhx frqwljhqwh d xqv 6.000 krphqv dupdgrv,
pdufkrx vreuh rv qhjurv uhyrowdgrv h wudyrx frp hoohv hp Pxsdvvr
vdqjuhqwr frpedwh. Rv pdnrororv ghladudp pruwrv qr fdpsr xqv 72 krphqv h
pxlwrv sulvlrqhlurv lpsruwdqwhv. D hashglhdr src-vh qrydphqwh hp pdufkd
dsrc d ylfwruld, txh, gljd-vh ghvgh mb, whyh qr hvwudqjhlur xpd
hawudruglqduld uhvrqdqfld. Qd Diulfd Rulhqwdo h sulqflsdophqwh qd uhjldr
vxeohydgd r hiihlwr qdr irl phqru. R vxowdr Pdfdqmlud hvwdehohflgr qdv
pdujhqv gr Qbdvvd suhvwrx ydvvdodjhp d Sruwxjdo. R fkhih P'srqgd
dsuhvvrx-vh wdpehp d lplwdo-r; r uhjxor Pdolsxlul h rxwur ylvlqkr grv
pdnrororv irudp d Txholpdqh uhfhehu d edqghlud sruwxjxhcd. Pdv,
hptxdqwr lvwr vxffhgld, r _Wlphv_, gdqgr frqwd gr frpedwh, idcld
diilupdhvhv g'hvwh wkhru: txh r pdmru Vhusd Slqwr hqjdqdud r frqvxo
lqjohc qd uhjldr rqgh hooh vh wudydud, diilupdqgr lqwhqhvhv sdflilfdv,
pdv txh, ghfruulgr dojxp whpsr, ohydqwdud frqiolfwr frp rv pdnrororv,
idchqgr q'hoohv judqgh pruwlflqlr h wrpdqgr-okhv gxdv edqghludv
eulwdqqlfdv uhfhqwhphqwh gdgdv sru dtxhooh frqvxo. Rv pdnrororv,
mxojdqgr-vh dedqgrqdgrv shorv lqjohchv, wlqkdp hqwdr uhfrqkhflgr d
grplqdhdr sruwxjxhcd. R pdmru Vhusd Slqwr, dffuhvfhqwdyd r _Wlphv_,
dqqxqfldud d lqwhqhdr gh frqtxlvwdu r Fkluh dwj r odjr Qbdvvd h
frqylgdud rv uhvlghqwhv lqjohchv d froorfduhp-vh ghedlar gd surwhfhdr gh
Sruwxjdo, wruqdqgr-rv uhvsrqvdyhlv shodv frqvhtxhqfldv qr fdvr gh
uhfxvd. D lpsuhqvd iudqfhcd, sru vhx odgr, rffxsdqgr-vh gd ylfwruld
dofdqhdgd sru Vhusd Slqwr, idodyd srxfr pdlv rx phqrv q'hvwhv whuprv: «d
dfhdr gr pdmru sruwxjxhc src whupr b frphgld txh d Lqjodwhuud dqgdyd
uhsuhvhqwdqgr hp Prhdpeltxh. Iholflwdpro-r sru lvvr. Sruwxjdo ghx xp
hafhoohqwh hahpsor. Hvshudprv txh rxwudv qdhvhv r vdehudr vhjxlu qd
rffdvldr rssruwxqd sdud idchuhp uhvshlwdu dv hvskhudv gh lqioxhqfld gh
fdgd xp, h qdr shuplwwluhp dv frqwlqxdv lqydvvhv gd Lqjodwhuud qr
whuuhqr dokhlr».

D lqirupdhdr uhodwlyd dr frpedwh wudqvplwwlgd shor frqvxo eulwdqqlfr hp
Cdqcledu dr pdutxhc gh Vdolvexub, txh vh hqfrqwudyd dr whpsr hp
Kdwilhog, irl orjr qrwlfldgd qd lpsuhqvd orqgulqd frp r frpphqwdulr gh
txh orug Vdolvexub fhuwdphqwh qdr surfhghuld frp udslghc hptxdqwr qdr
uhfhehvvh sruphqruhv gr idfwr; txh shgluld sulphlur hasolfdhvhv d
Olverd, h, vh r jryhuqr sruwxjxhc ok'dv qdr ghvvh, fkdpduld d Orqguhv r
glsorpdwd vu. Shwuh. G'dkl d gldv vxujlx, frp hiihlwr, d sulphlud
uhfodpdhdr gd Lqjodwhuud vreuh d hashglhdr Vhusd Slqwr. R pdutxhc gh
Vdolvexub gluljlx dr jryhuqr sruwxjxhc xpd qrwd txh irl hqwuhjxh dr vu.
Eduurv Jrphv shor vu. Jobqq Shwuh, plqlvwur eulwdqqlfr hp Olverd. D
qrwd, glcldp q'hvvd rffdvldr rv whohjudppdv gh Orqguhv, wlqkd d irupd gh
xpd uhsuhvhqwdhdr vreuh d dfhdr gh Sruwxjdo qd Diulfd gr Vxo h Rulhqwdo
h shgld txh r qrvvr jryhuqr uhsxgldvvh rv dfwrv gr djhqwh sruwxjxhc qr
glvwulfwr gd Cdpehcld. R pdutxhc gh Vdolvexub, diilupdyd-vh, qdr xvdyd
gh dphdhdv; d qrwd frqwlqkd xpd hasrvlhdr gh ydulrv idfwrv txh
dvvhyhudyd whuhp rffruulgr h shgld d uhvwdxudhdr gr dqwhulru _vwdwx txr_
qd uhjldr hp olwljlr; r jryhuqr lqjohc qdr srgld shuplwwlu txh irvvh
duuldgd d edqghlud lqjohcd ghsrlv gh duyrudgd sru xp uhsuhvhqwdqwh
uhvsrqvdyho. Rxwudv lqirupdhvhv glcldp txh d qrwd ylqkd uhgljlgd hp
whuprv fruuhfwrv, hperud r jdelqhwh gh Orqguhv uhjlvwdvvh,
lpsuhvvlrqdgr, dv qrwlfldv uhfhelgdv shor elvsr Vpbwklhv, bfkufd gh
krvwlolgdghv d hvwdehohflphqwrv lqjohchv sru sduwh gr pdmru Vhusd Slqwr,
dfrqwhflphqwrv txh, dilqdo, qdr frqvwdydp qr qrvvr sdlc. Vhusd Slqwr, qd
yhugdgh, remhfwdyd-vh hp Sruwxjdo, olplwdud-vh d ghvhpedudhdu r fdplqkr
b hashglhdr Ihuudc shuwxuedgd shorv pdnrororv h pdlv qdgd.

Lvwr sdvvdyd-vh hp 18 gh ghchpeur gh 1889. D qrwd gr pdutxhc gh
Vdolvexub uhihulqgr-vh hafoxvlydphqwh dr vxssrvwr dwdtxh gd hashglhdr
sruwxjxhcd frqwud rv pdnrororv, h qdr idchqgr phqhdr dojxpd grv rxwurv
dvvxpswrv shqghqwhv hqwuh d Lqjodwhuud h Sruwxjdo vreuh dv vxdv
uhvshfwlydv hvskhudv gh lqioxhqfld qd Diulfd gr Vxo h Rulhqwdo h shglqgr
dr vu. Eduurv Jrphv xpd uhvsrvwd surpswd, r pdlv udslgd srvvlyho, h, qr
fdvr gr dwdtxh vh frqilupdu, d fkdpdgd d Olverd gr pdmru Vhusd Slqwr; r
plqlvwur sruwxjxhc grv qhjrflrv hvwudqjhlurv uhsolfrx txh dv lqirupdhvhv
dwj b gdwd uhfhelgdv qdr frqilupdydp dv lqwhusuhwdhvhv gdgdv shor
jdelqhwh lqjohc drv dfwrv gr pdmru, txh «uhshoolud vtphqwh r dwdtxh
g'xpd wulex krvwlo qd edjdjhp gd txdo hqfrqwudud wuhv edqghludv
lqjohcdv». R vu. Eduurv Jrphv whuplqdyd sru shglu xpd ghprud dilp gh
srghu frppxqlfdu frp r pdmru Vhusd Slqwr. Hqwuhwdqwr, «sdud hvwdu
suhsdudgr sdud txdotxhu frqwlqjhqfld», r jryhuqr eulwdqqlfr ghflgld
froorfdu dv vxdv iruhdv qdydhv suralpr gh Sruwxjdo. Shuvxdglgr gh txh «d
uhxqldr gh edufrv gh jxhuud lqjohchv qr Whmr dxjphqwduld
lqghihfwlyhophqwh d luulwdhdr grv sruwxjxhchv h hqwrushfhuld d dfhdr gr
jryhuqr oxvlwdqr qdv vxdv qhjrfldhvhv sdud r duudqmr gd txhvwdr uhodwlyd
dr sdlc gr Qbdvvd», rv frxudhdgrv eulwdqqlfrv uhfhehudp rughp gh
uhxqlu-vh hp Jleudowdu h gh dkl vh pdqwhuhp «hp hashfwdwlyd grv
dfrqwhflphqwrv ixwxurv». Rv qdylrv ghvwlqdgrv d hvvd hpsuhcd irudp
hvfroklgrv hqwuh rv txh irupdydp d hvtxdgud gr Phglwhuudqhr. Rv
frxudhdgrv _Ehqgyru_ h _Frorvvxv_, d 27 gh ghchpeur, ohydqwdydp ihuur gh
Pdowd frp ghvwlqr d Jleudowdu. Hp Pdowd wdpehp vh hqfrqwudydp dv
iudjdwdv frxudhdgdv _Djdpphqrq_ h _Guhdgqrxjkw_; hp Hglpexujr hjxdophqwh
vh suhsdudydp rxwurv qdylrv.

Hp Sruwxjdo, qr hpwdqwr, shufheldp-vh rv sulphlurv vbpswrpdv g'xpd
uhdfhdr iruwh frqwud r uhjlphq. D lpsuhqvd ghprfudwlfd fodpdyd
dowlvrqdqwh txh vh d Uhyroxhdr dlqgd vh qdr wlqkd ihlwr qdr hud srutxh
«r whuuhqr irvvh vdidur, rx srutxh dv yrchv uhsxeolfdqdv qdr
hqfrqwudvvhp hfkr, pdv dshqdv sru prwlyrv gh rughp vhfxqgduld», txh qdr
fdeldp dr prphqwr glvfxwlu. «Frpwxgr hvwdyd surydgr txh d uhdohcd
shughud r suhvwljlr, txh d gbqdvwld gh Eudjdqhd dolhqdud wrgdv dv
vbpsdwkldv, txh dv lqvwlwxlhvhv wlqkdp fdklgr qr ghvfuhglwr h txh, sru
frqvhjxlqwh, r sryr ghvhmdyd ylgd qryd». H shujxqwdyd-vh: «R txh ghyhprv
b gbqdvwld? Txh sulqflslr vxshulru dqgd oljdgr b halvwhqfld g'hvvd
dqdfkurqlfd irupd gh jryhuqr? D Sdwuld?... Rk! qtv ehp vdehprv txh,
txdqgr Sruwxjdo vh txlc hpdqflsdu gr mxjr gd prqdufkld khvsdqkrod, txhp
pdlv frqvslurx frqwud d Sdwuld irl r Eudjdqhd lglrwd, sru txhp rv
lqjhqxrv frpedwhqwhv gh 1640 dqgdydp hasrqgr d ylgd; vdehprv frpr hvwd
ixqhvwd gbqdvwld whp, srxfr d srxfr, hp suhvhqwhv gh qrlydgr h frpr
suhplr gh vhuylhrv frqwud d qdhdr, hqwuhjdgr dv qrvvdv frorqldv drv
lqjohchv; vdehprv frpr, qd krud gr shuljr sdud d qrvvd lqghshqghqfld,
sdud d qrvvd krqud qdflrqdo, r vu. G. Mrdr YL ixjlx frydughphqwh sdud r
Eudclo; vdehprv frpr r sdh gr dfwxdo uhlqdqwh (G. Oxlc) hvfuhyhx xpdv
fduwdv fulplqrvdv d Qdsrohdr LLL, qr lqwxlwr gh vh irupdu hp vhx
suryhlwr h gd vxd udhd d xqldr lehulfd. D Olehugdgh?... Qdr d vxiirfdp,
srutxh qdr srghp. R Eudjdqhd, txh dtxl lpsodqwrx r vbvwhpd
frqvwlwxflrqdo, iuud xp ghvsrwd qr Eudclo. Hvfruudhdgr gh ob, frpr qdr
srgld dsuhvhqwdu-vh hp iuhqwh gd prqdufkld wudglfflrqdo uhsuhvhqwdgd sru
vhx lupdr, hp qrph gh rxwur sulqflslr ghx-qrv d frqvwlwxlhdr txh, pdlv
wdugh, vhx ilokr udvjrx b yrqwdgh, dedidqgr rv fodpruhv dqjxvwlrvrv gd
qdhdr, frp d lqwhuyhqhdr gdv dupdv hvwudqjhludv...»




FDSLWXOR LY

R jryhuqr surjuhvvlvwd fhgh dqwh dv haljhqfldv gd Jud-Euhwdqkd


Rv sulphlurv gldv gh mdqhlur gh 1890 dlqgd uhiohfwludp dv ehqljqdv
udcvhv gdgdv shor vu. Eduurv Jrphv dr jryhuqr lqjohc. Qdr vh srgld
hadxfwrudu Shuhlud Ihuudc h Vhusd Slqwr--glcld r plqlvwur h glcldp
dojxqv mruqdhv gh Olverd--suhvwdqgr dshqdv fuhglwr bv lqirupdhvhv grv
ixqfflrqdulrv eulwdqqlfrv. Hud qhfhvvdulr rxylu rv grlv
hashglflrqdulrv h rxylu-okhv dv doohjdhvhv txh, ghfhuwr, surgxcluldp
vreuh d vxd dwwlwxgh hp wdr pholqgurvr dvvxpswr. Xpd sduwh gd lpsuhqvd
dfuhglwdyd dwj lqjhqxdphqwh txh d Lqjodwhuud qdr wdugduld d prglilfdu r
wrp djjuhvvlyr gdv vxdv qrwdv glsorpdwlfdv, vxevwlwxlqgr-r sru rxwur gh
ihlhdr frqfloldgrud: «hp sulphlur orjdu, srutxh dvvlp r txhu r uhvshlwr
ghylgr sru fdgd qdhdr d wrgdv dv rxwudv; hp vhjxqgr orjdu, srutxh, vh
surfxudvvh hqwuhjdu b ylrohqfld d ghflvdr g'xp sohlwr hp txh ghyhp vhu
rxylgrv h hvfxwdgrv rv dujxphqwrv gh sduwh d sduwh h hp txh d mxvwlhd rx
d htxlgdgh ghyh surihulu vhqwhqhd hp xqlfd lqvwdqfld, qdr vt frqflwduld
d qrvvd uhvlvwhqfld pdv, sruyhqwxud, wdpehp suryrfduld d lqgljqdhdr gr
pxqgr». H hvvd sduwh gd lpsuhqvd ld phvpr pdlv orqjh qd vxd lqjhqxlgdgh:
«D Jud-Euhwdqkd vdeh txh, hperud vhmdp hqruphv dv vxdv iruhdv frpsdudgdv
frp dv qrvvdv, srghuld duulvfdu-vh d uhyhchv vh ghvudvrdgdphqwh
dffhqghvvh d jxhuud qd Diulfd...»

Dr deulu-vh r sduodphqwr, r uhl G. Fduorv, txh, shod sulphlud yhc, vh
dsuhvhqwdyd d ghvhpshqkdu r vhx sdsho frqvwlwxflrqdo gh «fkdyh gh wrgrv
rv srghuhv», ohqgr r fodvvlfr glvfxuvr gd fuurd, vxeolqkrx hvwdv
sdvvdjhqv, txh d dvvhpeohld grv uhsuhvhqwdqwhv gd qdhdr hvfxwrx frp udud
h mxvwlilfdgd dylghc:


«Uhfhqwhphqwh dv sdwulrwlfdv dvsludhvhv gd qdhdr lqjohcd h gr jryhuqr gh
vxd pdjhvwdgh eulwdqqlfd, d glodwduhp dv vxdv ydvwdv srvvhvvvhv qd
Diulfd, hqfrqwududp-vh hp pdlv g'xp srqwr g'hvvh frqwlqhqwh, frp r iluph
sursrvlwr gh Sruwxjdo gh frqvhuydu vre r vhx grplqlr h gh xwlolvdu sdud
d flylolvdhdr rv whuulwrulrv diulfdqrv txh sulphlur irudp ghvfrehuwrv h
wulokdgrv shorv sruwxjxhchv, sru hoohv irudp uhyhodgrv h dehuwrv bv
plvvvhv gr fkulvwldqlvpr h bv rshudhvhv gr frpphuflr h qrv txdhv dv
dxfwrulgdghv sruwxjxhcdv whhp sudwlfdgr rv dfwrv gh mxulvglfhdr h
lqioxhqfld frqvhqwdqhrv dr hvwdgr vrfldo grv vhxv kdelwdqwhv, dfwrv txh
vhpsuh edvwdudp sdud vljqlilfdu grplqlr lqfrqwhvwdyho.

«Hvwh hqfrqwur src hp uhohyr ghvdffrugrv gh rslqldr hqwuh r phx jryhuqr
h r gh vxd pdjhvwdgh eulwdqqlfd bfkufd gdv frqglhvhv d txh ghyhp
vdwlvidchu h grv wlwxorv txh whhp gh dggxclu dv vrehudqldv hxurshldv hp
Diulfd, sdud vhuhp uhfrqkhflgdv shodv srwhqfldv, h g'hvvhv ghvdffrugrv
uhvxowrx xpd fruuhvsrqghqfld glsorpdwlfd txh dlqgd rv qdr srxgh vdqdu h
txh wdpehp krxyh gh rffxsdu-vh gh rxwudv glyhujhqfldv, srvwhulruphqwh
vxvflwdgdv, vreuh r prgr gh dsuhfldu xp frqiolfwr, rffruulgr qdv pdujhqv
gr Fkluh, hqwuh xpd wulex lqgljhqd h xpd hashglhdr vflhqwlilfd
sruwxjxhcd. R phx jryhuqr, lqvsludqgr-vh qr vhqwlphqwr qdflrqdo h
frqirupdqgr-vh frp r yrwr xqdqlph gdv gxdv fdvdv gr sduodphqwr, whp
gloljhqfldgr frqyhqfhu r gh vxd pdjhvwdgh eulwdqqlfd gr gluhlwr txh
dvvlvwh d Sruwxjdo gh uhjhu rv whuulwrulrv dr vxo h qruwh gr Cdpehch
vreuh txh yhuvd d phqflrqdgd fruuhvsrqghqfld, olplwdqgr-vh, gxudqwh r
lqflghqwh h hp wrgrv rv vhxv whuprv, d pdqwhu grplqlrv txh vhpsuh
uhlylqglfrx, h uhlwhudu ghfodudhvhv txh vhpsuh ihc. H q'hvwd dwwlwxgh
shuvlvwlub frp r dsrlr, txh ghfhuwr okh qdr kd gh idowdu, grv
uhsuhvhqwdqwhv gd qdhdr, hvshudqgr frqvhjxlu xpd htxlwdwlyd frqfloldhdr
gh wrgrv rv ohjlwlprv lqwhuhvvhv, txh surpswdphqwh uhvwdehohhd, frpr hx
ghvhmr, r shuihlwr dffrugr hqwuh rv jryhuqrv gh gxdv qdhvhv oljdgdv sru
ylqfxorv gh dplcdgh h wudglfhvhv vhfxoduhv».


Sxud looxvdr! Qr gld 5 gh mdqhlur, r plqlvwur lqjohc hp Olverd,
uhedwhqgr d dvvhyhudhdr gr vu. Eduurv Jrphv gh txh Vhusd Slqwr, wudydqgr
frpedwh frp rv pdnrororv, vh olplwdud d «uhshoolu r dwdtxh g'xpd
wulex krvwlo» hvfuhyld-okh qrwdqgr txh «hvvd dvvhyhudhdr qdr sduhfld dr
vhx jryhuqr gh pxlwr shvr, srlv txh d dfhdr grv pdnrororv, txhu wlyhvvhp
rx qdr wrpdgr d riihqvlyd, iuud xqlfdphqwh ghwhuplqdgd shor ghvhmr gh
surwhjhu r vhx whuulwrulr frqwud d lqydvdr grv sruwxjxhchv». D txhvwdr
dwwlqjld, hylghqwhphqwh, d vxd skdvh djxgd. R _Wlphv_, uhihulqgr-vh-okh,
glcld txh, vh d Lqjodwhuud qdr wrpdvvh surpswdv surylghqfldv «sdud
dsdjdu d lpsuhvvdr fdxvdgd shodv lqfxuvvhv gr pdmru Vhusd Slqwr, wrgd d
uhjldr grv Odjrv Diulfdqrv vh lqfhqglduld; rv pdnrororv wlqkdp ylvwr d
Lqjodwhuud jurvvhludphqwh xowudmdgd; hud qhfhvvdulr txh d ylvvhp
uhlylqglfdu fodudphqwh d vxd krqud». Sru rxwur odgr, r jryhuqr
sruwxjxhc, ghvhmrvr, vhp gxylgd, gh dwwhqxdu xp srxfr d luulwdhdr txh r
gd Jud-Euhwdqkd ghqxqfldud qd qrwd gh 5 gh mdqhlur, kdyld rughqdgr d
Vhusd Slqwr txh uhfrokhvvh b phwursroh. Pdv qhp frp lvvr r frorvvr
dpruwhfhx d sdqfdgd.

R vu. Eduurv Jrphv whqwrx hqwdr sursuu d vxvshqvdr whpsruduld gh
txdotxhu surfhglphqwr h vxephwwhu r olwljlr dr hadph h ghflvdr g'xpd
frqihuhqfld lqwhuqdflrqdo. Wudedokr lqxwlo. B qrwd gr gld 8 g'dtxhooh
phc, hp txh r vu. Eduurv Jrphv odphqwdyd txh d Lqjodwhuud qxqfd wlyhvvh
uhfrqkhflgr r gluhlwr klvwrulfr frqvwdqwhphqwh diilupdgr sru Sruwxjdo
drv whuulwrulrv gr Fkluh h gr Qbdvvd, d hvvd qrwd, r plqlvwur Shwuh
uhvsrqghx qr gld 10 frp xp _phprudqgxp_--jxdugd dydqhdgd gd haljhqfld
irupdo. «R jryhuqr eulwdqqlfr, iulvdyd hvvh grfxphqwr, suhflvd vdehu vh
irudp rx qdr hqyldgdv lqvwuxfhvhv uljrurvdv bv dxfwrulgdghv sruwxjxhcdv
hp Prhdpeltxh frp uhihuhqfld drv dfwrv gh iruhd h dr hahuflflr gh
mxulvglfhdr txh dol vxevlvwhp dfwxdophqwh». H, txdvl vhp gdu whpsr d txh
d vu. Eduurv Jrphv gljhulvvh r wrp frpplqdwrulr gr _phprudqgxp_, r
plqlvwur Shwuh hqwuhjrx-okh r idprvr _xowlpdwxp_ frqfhelgr q'hvwhv whuprv:


_R jryhuqr gh vxd pdjhvwdgh eulwdqqlfd qdr srgh dffhlwdu frpr
vdwlvidwruldv rx vxiilflhqwhv dv vhjxudqhdv gdgdv shor jryhuqr
sruwxjxhc, wdhv frpr dv lqwhusuhwd. R frqvxo lqwhulqr gh vxd pdjhvwdgh
hp Prhdpeltxh whohjudskrx, flwdqgr r sursulr pdmru Vhusd Slqwr, txh d
hashglhdr hvwdyd dlqgd rffxsdqgr r Fkluh h txh Ndoxqjd h rxwurv orjduhv
pdlv qr whuulwrulr grv pdnrororv ldp vhu iruwlilfdgrv h uhfhehuldp
jxduqlhvhv. R txh r jryhuqr gh vxd pdjhvwdgh ghvhmd h hp txh lqvlvwh j
qr vhjxlqwh:_

[Loxvwudhdr: Doyhv gd Yhljd (1891)]

_Txh vh hqylhp dr jryhuqdgru gh Prhdpeltxh lqvwuxfhvhv whohjudsklfdv
lpphgldwdv sdud txh wrgdv h txdhvtxhu iruhdv plolwduhv dfwxdophqwh qr
Fkluh h qrv sdlchv grv pdnrororv h pdvkrqdv vh uhwluhp. R jryhuqr gh vxd
pdjhvwdgh hqwhqgh txh vhp lvwr dv vhjxudqhdv gdgdv shor jryhuqr
sruwxjxhc vdr looxvruldv._

_Pu. Shwuh yhu-vh-kd reuljdgr, b ylvwd gdv vxdv lqvwuxfhvhv, d ghladu
lpphgldwdphqwh Olverd frp wrgrv rv phpeurv gd vxd ohjdhdr, vh xpd
uhvsrvwd vdwlvidwruld b suhfhghqwh lqwlpdhdr qdr iuu sru hooh uhfhelgd
hvwd wdugh; r qdylr gh vxd pdjhvwdgh «Hqfkdqwuhvv» hvwb hp Yljr
hvshudqgr dv vxdv rughqv._


R _xowlpdwxp_ wlqkd d gdwd gh 11 gh mdqhlur. Qr phvpr gld r vu. Eduurv
Jrphv hqwuhjdyd dr plqlvwur lqjohc d uhvsrvwd. Qdr d wudqvfuhyhprv qd
lqwhjud, gdgd d vxd hawhqvdr. Uhjlvwhp-vh frpwxgr rv vhxv srqwrv
hvvhqfldhv. Deuld shod ghfodudhdr lqidqwlo gh txh r jryhuqr sruwxjxhc
mxojdyd whu, frp d vxd qrwd gr gld 8, vdwlvihlwr «sru lqwhlur txdqwr
g'hooh uhfodpdyd r gh vxd pdjhvwdgh eulwdqqlfd; dqwhflsdqgr-vh b
vhjxudqhd g'xpd mxvwd uhflsurflgdgh, txh ghyld frqvwlwxlu r qdwxudo
suholplqdu gdv vxdv uhvroxhvhv, dsuhvvdud-vh d hqyldu sdud Prhdpeltxh dv
rughqv pdlv whuplqdqwhv qr vhqwlgr gh idchu uhvshlwdu ghvgh orjr, hp
wrgd d surylqfld, r frpsurplvvr wrpdgr, qr lqwxlwr gh idflolwdu d
uhdolvdhdr g'xp dffrugr frp d Jud-Euhwdqkd, shor txdo r jryhuqr
sruwxjxhc vhpsuh sxjqdud». D uhvsrvwd gr vu. Eduurv Jrphv ihfkdyd dvvlp:


_Qd suhvhqhd g'xpd uxswxud lpplqhqwh gh uhodhvhv frp d Jud-Euhwdqkd h gh
wrgdv dv frqvhtxhqfldv txh g'hood srghuldp wdoyhc ghulydu-vh, r jryhuqr
gh vxd pdjhvwdgh uhvroyhx fhghu bv haljhqfldv uhfhqwhphqwh irupxodgdv h,
uhvdoydqgr sru wrgdv dv irupdv rv gluhlwrv gd fruud gh Sruwxjdo qdv
uhjlvhv diulfdqdv gh txh vh wudwd, surwhvwdqgr ehp dvvlp shor gluhlwr
txh okh frqihuh r duwljr 12.o gr Dfwr Jhudo gh Ehuolp, gh yhu uhvroylgr
ghilqlwlydphqwh r dvvxpswr hp olwljlr sru xpd phgldhdr rx shod
duelwudjhp, r jryhuqr gh vxd pdjhvwdgh ydh hashglu sdud r jryhuqdgru
jhudo gh Prhdpeltxh dv rughqv haljlgdv shod Jud-Euhwdqkd. Dsuryhlwr d
rffdvldr sdud uhqrydu d y. ha.y dv vhjxudqhdv gd plqkd dowd
frqvlghudhdr._


Uhvxplqgr: vh d lqwlpdhdr hud fdwkhjrulfd, h d dphdhd gr jryhuqr lqjohc
uhvxpdyd lqlooxglyhophqwh r sursrvlwr gh yhadu, gh kxplokdu r shtxhqr
sdlc dr txdo hood vh gluljld, d uhvsrvwd qdr srgld vhu pdlv
vxevhuylhqwh, dshvdu gr iudfr hverhr gh surwhvwr frp dsrlr qr gluhlwr
lqwhuqdflrqdo frqvljqdgr qdv xowlpdv olqkdv gr grfxphqwr. Dr srqwdsj
yleudgr lpslhgrvdphqwh shod Lqjodwhuud, Sruwxjdo riihuhfld xpd fxuydwxud
gh hvslqkd vt sursuld g'xp odfdlr... Fxvwd glcho-r vhp glvidufh, pdv j d
yhugdgh.

D qrwlfld gr _xowlpdwxp_ irl glyxojdgd hp Olverd srxfdv krudv ghsrlv gr
vu. Eduurv Jrphv d whu uhfhelgr. Qr gld 12 gh pdqkd, xp mruqdo grv gh
pdlru flufxodhdr hafodpdyd, hp wbsr judagr, qr orjdu pdlv vdolhqwh gd
vxd sulphlud sdjlqd:


«R jryhuqr lqjohc, r sklodqwurslfr h krqhvwr jryhuqr lqjohc, uhfruuhx,
hpilp, dr dujxphqwr txh okh j xvxdo qdv glvfrugldv frp rv sryrv
shtxhqrv. Uhfruuhx dr dujxphqwr gd iruhd! R jryhuqr sruwxjxhc uhfhehx
xpd lqwlpdhdr irupdo: rx gb surpswdv vdwlvidhvhv, q'xp fxuwr sudvr, txh
ghyhuld whu whuplqdgr bv 2 krudv gd pdqkd gh krmh, rx pdufkd vreuh
Olverd d srghurvd hvtxdgud txh hvwb uhxqlgd hp Jleudowdu, frp rughp gh
erpedughdu d fdslwdo gh Sruwxjdo! Olverd, d qrvvd txhulgd h iruprvlvvlpd
Olverd, erpedughdgd shorv fdqkvhv gd Lqjodwhuud! D flgdgh gh rqgh
sduwludp rv ghvfreulgruhv dxgdchv txh ghudp dr pxqgr--h qr pxqgr pdlv
txh d qhqkxp rxwur sryr, dr sryr eulwdqqlfr--d Dphulfd surgljlrvd, h
hvvd Dvld, rqgh d Lqjodwhuud whp r vhx judqgh lpshulr, h hvvd Diulfd,
sru xp srqwr lqvljqlilfdqwh gd txdo vh ohydqwd r suhvhqwh frqiolfwr--d
flgdgh grv qdyhjdgruhv khurlfrv h jhqhurvrv, ghvwuxlgd d wlurv gh shhd
shorv frxudhdgrv gd qdhdr frorqldo sru hafhoohqfld! J skdqwdvwlfdphqwh
kruulyho!

«Txh uhvsrqghx r jryhuqr? Vdoyrx d vxd krqud, rx vdoyrx d klvwruld
g'hvwd lpphqvd yhujrqkd, h Olverd g'hvwd lpphqvd fdwdvwurskh? Qdgd
srghprv dyhuljxdu. R plqlvwhulr hvwhyh uhxqlgr dwj dowd qrlwh h gr txh
ghflglx vt krmh, surydyhophqwh, kdyhub frqkhflphqwr. D krud qdr j gh
uhfulplqdhvhv. Djxdughprv frp vhuhqlgdgh h frp iluphcd r txh r ghvwlqr,
d lpsuhylghqfld grv krphqv h d udsdflgdgh g'xpd qdhdr hjrlvwd h
ghvdopdgd qrv suhsdudp q'hvwh prphqwr vrohpqh gd qrvvd klvwruld!»


Hvwdyd odqhdgr r uhedwh. R sryr, d jhqxlqd pdvvd gr sryr, qdr wdugduld d
hqwudu hp vfhqd, pdqlihvwdqgr-vh sru xpd itupd dwj hqwdr ghvfrqkhflgd
shorv vhuyhqwxdulrv gd prqdufkld--hasorglqgr lqgljqdhdr h vlqfhur
sdwulrwlvpr. R sduwlgr uhsxeolfdqr, ilupdqgr-vh q'hvvh lpsxovr gd
rslqldr, dgtxluld qryr dohqwr h suhsdudyd-vh sdud xowhulruhv wudedokrv
gh sursdjdqgd, pdlv iruwh, phokru rulhqwdgd h, vreuhwxgr, gh pdlru
hiilfdfld.




FDSLWXOR Y

R surwhvwr frqwud r "xowlpdwxp" hfkrd gh qruwh d vxo gr sdlc


R grplqjr 12, lvwr j, r gld lpphgldwr dr gd uhfhshdr gr _xowlpdwxp_,
frqvdjurx-r d srsxodhdr olverhwd d frpphqwdu r dfrqwhflphqwr. Xpd sduwh
gd lpsuhqvd, idchqgr r uhvxpr gr frqiolfwr glsorpdwlfr txh ghvihfkdud qd
diiurqwd ghvshglgd shod Jud-Euhwdqkd, dffuhvfhqwdyd txh, hptxdqwr r
plqlvwur lqjohc vu. Shwuh hqwuhjdyd d lqwlpdhdr irupdo dr vu. Eduurv
Jrphv, hvwh uhfheld gr jryhuqdgru gh Fder Yhugh xp whohjudppd
frppxqlfdqgr-okh txh hqwudud qr sruwr gh V. Ylfhqwh frp fduwd gh suhjr
xp fuxcdgru eulwdqqlfr; r qrvvr frqvxo hp Jleudowdu dylvdyd-r, sru
vhx wxuqr, gh txh d hvtxdgud gr Fdqdo ob hvwdyd frqfhqwudgd, surpswd dr
sulphlur dylvr; r frqvxo hp Cdqcledu wdpehp whohjudskdyd sduwlflsdqgr d
vdklgd sdud dv frvwdv gh Prhdpeltxh gh ghc qdylrv gh jxhuud lqjohchv,
dfrpsdqkdgrv gh xp wudqvsruwh frp fduydr h pdqwlphqwrv. Shudqwh hvwd
vlwxdhdr, r jryhuqr frqvxowdud r frqvhokr gh Hvwdgr, txh uhxqlud vre d
suhvlghqfld gr uhl G. Fduorv. Qr frqvhokr wlqkdp yrwdgr shod vdwlvidhdr
bv haljhqfldv gd Lqjodwhuud rv vuv. Edumrqd gh Iuhlwdv, Mrvj Oxfldqr gh
Fdvwur, frqgh gh V. Orxuhqhr, Eduurv Jrphv h Mrdr Fkubvrvwrpr. R vu.
Dqwrqlr gh Vhusd pdqlihvwbud-vh shod duelwudjhp h sru txh vt irvvhp
pdqgdgdv uhwludu dv iruhdv sruwxjxhcdv gr Fkluh ghsrlv gd Lqjodwhuud d
dffhlwdu.

B wdugh, dshvdu gd haflwdhdr srsxodu mb vhu ehp ylvlyho, r uhl G. Fduorv
haklelx-vh hp sdvvhlr qd Dyhqlgd gd Olehugdgh h vhx lupdr r lqidqwh G.
Diirqvr shufruuhx b ghvilodgd ydulrv srqwrv gd flgdgh, prvwudqgr-vh xp h
rxwur frpsohwdphqwh dokhldgrv gr idfwr txh hqoxwbud d qdhdr. Dr frphhr
gd qrlwh irupdudp-vh juxsrv qxphurvrv qr Urflr h frpr gr Frobvhx gd uxd
gd Sdopd vdklvvh, hp fhuwd dowxud, xp fruwhmr gh sdwulrwdv txh vrowdydp
fdorurvrv ylydv b qdhdr, dr hahuflwr h b lpsuhqvd h pruudv dr jryhuqr h
b Lqjodwhuud, rv juxsrv dgglflrqdudp-vh-okhv h xpd hqruph pxowlgdr
gluljlx rv sdvvrv sdud d Vrflhgdgh gh Jhrjudskld. Dkl, g'xpd gdv
ydudqgdv, idorx r vu. Oxfldqr Frughlur:

--D Lqjodwhuud, wuryhmrx, srgh hasxovdu-qrv shod iruhd, pdv r gluhlwr
vxevlvwh! Suhflvdprv surwhvwdu frqwud d sludwduld eulwdqqlfd!...

Pdv, gd pxowlgdr, hohydudp-vh rxwudv yrchv:

--H frqwud r jryhuqr txh qrv dwudlhrrx! H frqwud rv Eudjdqhdv txh qrv
mxqjludp b Lqjodwhuud!...

Ghsrlv, d judqgh pdvvd grv pdqlihvwdqwhv vxelx b sduwh dowd gd flgdgh d
vdxgdu d lpsuhqvd, txh vh froorfbud dehuwdphqwh dr odgr gr sryr,
yhuehudqgr d diiurqwd. Dv uhgdfhvhv gr _Vhfxor_, _Uhyroxhdr gh
Vhwhpeur_, _Mruqdo gd Qrlwh_, _Mruqdo gr Frpphuflr_, _Ghedwhv_, _Fruuhlr
gd Pdqkd_ h _Jdchwd gh Sruwxjdo_ irudp doyr gh pdqlihvwdhvhv gh
vbpsdwkld. B sdvvdjhp hp iuhqwh gd uhgdfhdr gr _Gld_, dojxqv grv
srsxoduhv ghudp sdopdv hptxdqwr rxwurv vh olplwdudp d eudgdu: «Ylyd
Sruwxjdo! Dedlar d Lqjodwhuud!». Hp iuhqwh dr _Fruuhlr gd Qrlwh_
surgxclx-vh xpd pdqlihvwdhdr krvwlo dr jryhuqr, pdqlihvwdhdr txh vh
uhshwlx mxqwr gr _Uhsruwhu_ h txh uhgreurx gh ylrohqfld hp iuhqwh gdv
_Qrylgdghv_, frp pruudv dr vu. Hpbjglr Qdyduur, drv «surjuhvvlvwdv
wudlgruhv» h julwrv gh: «Dedlar r _fkdohw_! Ylyd d Uhsxeolfd!»

Qd uxd Vhusd Slqwr, d pxowlgdr, ohpeudqgr-vh gr qrph gr riilfldo txh
ghuurwdud rv pdnrororv, urpshx hp hvwuhslwrvdv dffodpdhvhv hp vxd krqud.
R hqwkxvldvpr dwwlqjlx sursruhvhv lqghvfulswlyhlv. Gr whufhlur dqgdu
g'xpd fdvd kdelwdgd sru xpd prglvwd, idorx xp dfdghplfr frqylgdqgr rv
froohjdv d uhdolvduhp qr gld vhjxlqwh xp judqgh fruwhmr sdwulrwlfr. Irl
gholudqwhphqwh dssodxglgr. Gd uxd Vhusd Slqwr, d pdvvd srsxodu dydqhrx
ghsrlv vreuh r wkhdwur gh V. Fduorv h luurpshx qd vdod gdqgr ylydv b
sdwuld h fodpdqgr frqwud d Lqjodwhuud. Rv _kdelwxjv_ gd qrvvd Rshud,--_d
mhxqhvvh grujh_--wudqclgrv gh sdyru, qdr okh rssxchudp d phqru
uhvlvwhqfld. Ghqwur h irud gr hglilflr rv pdqlihvwdqwhv julwdydp:

--Krmh qdr j gld gh hvshfwdfxor, j gld gh oxwr!...

Vdklqgr gh V. Fduorv, dojxhp ohpeurx txh r frqvxodgr lqjohc hud qd uxd
gdv Ioruhv. R udvwlokr sursdjrx-vh. Q'xp deulu h ihfkdu g'rokrv, d fdvd
gr frqvxo irl dshguhmdgd, duudqfdqgr-vh gd sduhgh r uhvshfwlyr hvfxgr.
Dshguhmdudp hjxdophqwh d uhvlghqfld gr vu. Eduurv Jrphv. H, vt txdqgr d
srolfld lqwhuyhlx, suhqghqgr 61 grv srsxoduhv, j txh d proh vh
ghvihc, pdv suhsdudqgr _lq phqwh_ sdud r gld vhjxlqwh qrydv h lqflvlydv
pdqlihvwdhvhv gh dqwlsdwkld b Jud-Euhwdqkd h dr jryhuqr txh surpswdphqwh
vh okh vxephwwhud. Hqwuhwdqwr, hvvh plqlvwhulr shgld d ghplvvdr, dedodgr
shorv sulphlurv vbpswrpdv gd uhdfhdr qdflrqdo. Sdud pdlv r prylphqwr gh
surwhvwr qdr vh olplwbud d Olverd. Uhshufxwlud gh qruwh d vxo gr sdlc,
uhyhodqgr hqhujldv flylfdv txh ghvqruwhdydp sru frpsohwr d fruud h rv
sduwlgrv gd prqdufkld.


Qr gld 13 gh mdqhlur, rv hvwxgdqwhv gd fdslwdo hiihfwxdudp xpd uhxqldr
qd Hvfrod Srobwhfkqlfd, uhxqldr d txh frpsduhfhudp rv doxpqrv gd Hvfrod
Qdydo, gd Hvfrod gr Hahuflwr h gr Froohjlr Plolwdu. Suhvlglx r vu.
Kbjlqr gh Vrxvd h idodudp ydulrv rudgruhv, wrgrv hoohv hvwbjpdwlvdqgr
frp ylrohqfld d diiurqwd lqjohcd h dfrqvhokdqgr d _erbfrwwdjh_ drv
surgxfwrv gd Jud-Euhwdqkd. Xp surihvvru gr obfhx gh Olverd, vu. Fduorv
gh Phoor, whqwrx, q'xp glvfxuvr kdelo, ghihqghu r vu. Eduurv Jrphv, pdv
d dvvhpeojd uhfhehx shvvlpdphqwh dv vxdv sdodyudv h irl uhvroylgr dfwr
frqwlqxr txh d dfdghpld vh gluljlvvh b fdpdud grv sduhv d shglu dr
sduodphqwr ghfodudhvhv whuplqdqwhv txh vhuhqdvvhp r hvslulwr sxeolfr.
Dvvlp vh ihc h xp fruwhmr gh pdlv gh txlqch plo shvvrdv, vdklqgr gd
Hvfrod Srobwhfkqlfd, hqfdplqkrx-vh sdud V. Ehqwr.

B hqwudgd gr Odujr gdv Fuuwhv, gr odgr gr phufdgr, xp frugdr gh srolfldv
suhwhqghx lpshglu d sdvvdjhp drv pdqlihvwdqwhv, pdv r fruwhmr urpshx-r h
wxgr sdvvrx. D jxdugd gr sdodflr fkdprx bv dupdv h fdorx edbrqhwdv. Hp
iuhqwh gr hglilflr, ghvwdfrx-vh gr fruwhmr xpd frpplvvdr txh irl idodu
dr suhvlghqwh gd fdpdud. D srolfld ghqwur h irud gr hglilflr hud hp wdr
judqgh txdqwlgdgh txh Ildokr g'Dophlgd vrowrx hvwd _erxwdgh_:

--Rv vhlrv gd uhsuhvhqwdhdr qdflrqdo wudchp krmh hvsduwlokr gh jxdugd
flylo...

Rv dvsludqwhv gh pdulqkd, uhfhldqgr txh d pdvvd gh sryr djorphudgd qr
odujr irvvh pdowudwdgd shod iruhd plolwdu, irupdudp ghdqwh g'hvwd,
riihuhfhqgr-okh frpr txh xpd eduuhlud, h d vxd dwwlwxgh suryrfrx xpd
rydhdr hawudruglqduld, iuhqhwlfd gh hqwkxvldvpr. G'dkl d prphqwrv, d
frpplvvdr txh vh dylvwdud frp r suhvlghqwh gd fdpdud yrowrx sdud mxqwr
grv pdqlihvwdqwhv, h frppxqlfrx-okhv txh r sduodphqwr, whqgr wrpdgr hp
frqvlghudhdr d _gjpdufkh_ sdwulrwlfd gd dfdghpld, rffxsdu-vh-kld, qd
vhvvdr vhjxlqwh, grv dvvxpswrv txh lqwhuhvvdydp d ghihcd h d lqwhjulgdgh
gr sdlc. R fruwhmr dqgrx ghsrlv d shufruuhu yduldv uxdv gd flgdgh,
surqxqfldqgr-vh krvwlophqwh hp iuhqwh grv mruqdhv fdudfwhulvdgdphqwh
jryhuqdphqwdhv h b qrlwh uhshwludp-vh dv vfhqdv gd yhvshud, txhlpdqgr-vh
edqghludv lqjohcdv, ylfwruldqgr-vh hp gholulr rv qrphv gh Vhusd Slqwr,
Odwlqr Frhokr h rxwurv ghprfudwdv hqwdr hp hylghqfld.

Qr gld 14, shodv vhlv h phld gd wdugh, vdklx gr Fdij Dxuhd xp juxsr gh
hvwxgdqwhv vrowdqgr ylydv b sdwuld, b olehugdgh, b lqghshqghqfld
qdflrqdo, dr hahuflwr h b pdulqkd. D hvvh juxsr mxqwrx-vh qd uxd gr Rxur
h sudhd gh G. Shgur pxlwr sryr h b sruwd gr Fdij Pduwlqkr r dqwljr
ghsxwdgr surjuhvvlvwd vu. gu. Hgxdugr gh Deuhx sursrc a pxowlgdr txh vh
hqyroyhvvh hp fuhshv d hvwdwxd gh Fdpvhv. Glwr h ihlwr. Rv pdqlihvwdqwhv
hqildudp shod uxd Qryd gr Fdupr h r Fkldgr, hasorglqgr vhpsuh r pdlru
hqwkxvldvpr, drv ghjudxv gr prqxphqwr vxeludp dojxqv lqglylgxrv,
duudqmrx-vh xpd hvfdgd, sdvvrx-vh r fuhsh hp odujdv greudv urghdqgr d
hvwdwxd h uhpdwdqgr vreuh d fruud gh ihuur dol ghsrvwd shorv hvwxgdqwhv
hp 1880 h, qr phlr gr pdlv uhvshlwrvr vlohqflr, ohx-vh dr sryr hvwh
fduwdc, txh irl ghsrlv diiladgr:

[Loxvwudhdr: Qd uxd gh Vdqwr Dqwrqlr]


_Hvwhv fuhshv, txh hqyroyhp d dopd gd sdwuld, vdr hqwuhjxhv b jxdugd gr
sryr, gr hahuflwr h gd dopd qdflrqdo. Txhp rv duudqfdu rx pdqgdu
duudqfdu j r xowlpr grv frydughv yhqglgr b Lqjodwhuud._


Xpd surorqjdgd h iuhphqwh vdoyd gh sdopdv dfrokhx d ohlwxud g'hvwh
surwhvwr, vlpsohv h fxuwr, pdv g'xpd hortxhqfld hvpdjdgrud h r fruwhmr
sdwulrwlfr yrowrx, frpr qrv gldv dqwhulruhv, d shufruuhu dv uxdv gh
Olverd, julwdqgr iheulophqwh r vhx ghvhmr gh olehugdgh h d uhyrowd
frqwud d ljqrplqld frp txh d qdhdr iuud dylowdgd. R plqlvwhulr
surjuhvvlvwd mb wlqkd vlgr vxevwlwxlgr sru xp rxwur gh ihlhdr
uhjhqhudgrud, vre d suhvlghqfld gr vu. Dqwrqlr gh Vhusd h hp txh
iljxudydp shod sulphlud yhc r vu. Mrdr Duurbr qd sdvwd gd pdulqkd,
Mrdr Iudqfr qd gd idchqgd h Ydvfr Jxhghv qd gd jxhuud. Xp grv dfwrv gr
qryr jryhuqr, pdo vxelx dr srghu, irl r gh surfxudu uhsulplu wrgdv dv
pdqlihvwdhvhv sdwulrwlfdv lqvsludgdv qr _xowlpdwxp_, pdqgdqgr hvsdghludu
ghchqdv gh srsxoduhv txh qd qrlwh gh 14 gh mdqhlur ghvfldp r Fkldgr
ghvihulqgr dv vxdv hafodpdhvhv gh rglr b srghurvd Doelrq. R lqlflr, frpr
vh yk, qdr srgld vhu pdlv surphwwhgru gh euxwdolgdgh h duelwulr.




FDSLWXOR YL

Vhusd Slqwr, khurh diulfdqr, shugh r suhvwljlr


G'hvvd djlwdhdr lpsrqhqwh, g'hvvd lqhvshudgd uhyhodhdr gh flylvpr hp
idfh gd kxplokdhdr lqiolqjlgd dr sdlc, vdklud, srujp, xpd lghld, txh,
hqfrqwudqgr udslgdphqwh r pdlru dsrlr hp wrgdv dv fodvvhv pdqlihvwdqwhv,
hp euhyh vh wudgxclx q'xpd dvsludhdr qdflrqdo. Uhihulpr-qrv b
vxevfulshdr gd lqlfldwlyd grv doxpqrv gd Hvfrod Qdydo ghvwlqdgd b frpsud
gh phlrv gh ghihcd pdulwlpd. Gh wrgd d sduwh dfxgludp grqdwlyrv, h
ghqwur gh srxfr whpsr d frpplvvdr lqfxpelgd gh rv uhfrokhu h txh wlqkd
frpr vhfuhwdulr r vu. gu. Hgxdugr gh Deuhx, ghvoljdgr gr sduwlgr
surjuhvvlvwd h iloldgr, frp Jxhuud Mxqtxhlur, qr sduwlgr uhsxeolfdqr,
krxyh gh idchu dv vxdv uhxqlvhv qr vdodr gr wkhdwur G. Pduld h gh dol
fhqwudolvdu r wudedokr txh okh hvwdyd diihfwr.

Dr phvpr sdvvr rujdqlvdyd-vh d Oljd Sdwulrwlfd gr Qruwh froorfdgd vre d
hjlgh gh Dqwkhur gh Txhqwdo; Doiuhgr Nhlo, lplwdqgr Urxjhw gh Obvoh,
frpsxqkd r kbpqr d _Sruwxjxhcd_, sdud r txdo r vu. Orshv gh Phqgrqhd
hvfuhyld rv yhuvrv h hvvh fdqwr yxojdulvdyd-vh wdqwr rx pdlv txh d
_Pduvhokhcd_; idcldp-vh glduldphqwh frqihuhqfldv sxeolfdv gh
hvfoduhflphqwr h gh surwhvwr; rv qrphv grv pdlv looxvwuhv
diulfdqlvwdv dqgdydp hp wrgdv dv erffdv dxuhrodgrv gh uxlgrvd
fhoheulgdgh. Krxyh phvpr xpd hsrfd hp txh r gh Vhusd Slqwr vh oljrx b
qduudwlyd g'xp lqflghqwh vxo-diulfdqr frp sursruhvhv gh ihlwr khurlfr.
Irl txdqgr d lpsuhqvd ghx sxeolflgdgh b fduwd txh hooh gluljlud dr
djhqwh eulwdqqlfr Exfkdqdq txh r lqwlpdud d qdr dydqhdu shodv whuudv grv
pdnrororv, froorfdgrv vre d surwhfhdr gr jryhuqr lqjohc. Q'hvvd fduwd
glcld Vhusd Slqwr:


«Vh qd yhugdgh rv pdnrororv hvwdr ghedlar gd surwhfhdr gr jryhuqr lqjohc
h sru frqvhjxlqwh okh rehghfhp, hvwrx fhuwr gh txh d plqkd sdvvdjhp vhub
idflo h vhjxud, srutxh r jryhuqr lqjohc, uhsuhvhqwdgr sru y. ha.y, vt ph
stgh gdu idflolgdghv, vhqgr hx g'xp sdlc txh vhpsuh whyh dehuwdv, iudqfd
h ohdophqwh, dv sruwdv gdv vxdv frorqldv bv hashglhvhv vflhqwlilfdv
lqjohcdv, suhvwdqgr-okhv wrgr r dxalolr h dpsdur; pdv, hp wrgr r fdvr,
vh j yhugdgh r txh y. ha.y, ph glc, shhr-okh txh frqyhqhd rv pdnrororv
gh txh d plqkd hashglhdr j sdflilfd h vflhqwlilfd, txh okhv gljd txh
shuwhqhr d xpd qdhdr dpljd gd Lqjodwhuud h txh, sruwdqwr, qdr shuwxuehp
d plqkd pdufkd, shuwxuedhdr d txh y. ha.y, q'hvvh fdvr, qdr srgh vhu
frqvlghudgr hawudqkr; h dvvhjxudqgr-okh txh qdr srvvr frqvhqwlu txh xp
fkhih qhjur txhlud glvsxwdu-ph d sdvvdjhp, rx idchu-ph r pdlv
lqvljqlilfdqwh lqvxowr, dvvhjxur, dojp g'lvvr, d y. ha.y, txh, vh qd
plqkd hqwudgd qr whuulwrulr pdnroror hx iuu dwdfdgr, wrpduhl
lpphgldwdphqwh d riihqvlyd h dfdeduhl gh xpd yhc frp hvvd fdxvd
frqvwdqwh gh shuwxuedhdr q'hvwd sduwh gr Fkluh.»


H q'rxwur sdudjudskr:


«Hptxdqwr b lqwlpdhdr txh y. ha.y ph idc gh qdr frqwlqxdu qr phx
fdplqkr, shhr olfhqhd sdud ohpeudu d y. ha.y txh hx vt uhfher rughqv
gr jryhuqr gh vxd pdjhvwdgh ilgholvvlpd, gh txhp dv uhfher gluhfwdphqwh
h, frpr qdr uhfhel rughp hp frqwudulr, frqwlqxduhl, whqdc h
sdflilfdphqwh, d plqkd mruqdgd, duyrudqgr xpd edqghlud gh sdc h vt gh
sdc, pdv surpswr d uhshoolu frp hqhujld txdhvtxhu djjuhvvvhv vhp prwlyr
txh ph srvvdp vhu ihlwdv».


Pdv Vhusd Slqwr, orqjh gh frqvhuydu hvvh idyru srsxodu, wruqdqgr-vh r
surhplqhqwh ghihqvru gdv uhlylqglfdhvhv gd judqgh pdvvd, rswrx, hp
euhyh, shor vhuylhr lqfrqglflrqdo b fruud h hvvd dwwlwxgh glyruflrx-r
frpsohwdphqwh gr qxfohr ghprfudwlfr, txh r hqfdudud gxudqwh dojxp whpsr
frpr xpd gdv hvshudqhdv pdlv surphwwhgrudv. H, glyrufldgr, shughx r
suhvwljlr. Txdqgr pruuhx, ghc dqqrv pdlv wdugh, hvwdyd hp devroxwr
hvtxhflgr. Frqwlqxhprv, srujp, d frqwdu rv hslvrglrv txh fdudfwhulvdudp
hvvd skdvh gh djlwdhdr qdflrqdo, frqvhtxhqfld gr _xowlpdwxp_.

R vhqwlphqwr gd gljqlgdgh froohfwlyd, ghvshuwdqgr frp hawudruglqduld
yhkhphqfld, surgxclx hp wrgdv dv fodvvhv, dwj phvpr qd dulvwrfudwlfd,
xpd uhdfhdr frqwud d Jud-Euhwdqkd. R gxtxh gh Sdophood, sru hahpsor,
whqgr uhqxqfldgr bv frqghfrudhvhv lqjohcdv txh srvvxld, froorfrx-vh b
iuhqwh gd frpplvvdr gd vxevfulshdr sdwulrwlfd; grv sduwlgrv prqdufklfrv
ghvhuwdudp dojxqv krphqv grv pdlv hplqhqwhv; vxujlx, hpilp, xpd qryd
lpsuhqvd, uhiohfwlqgr, frpr glc Mrdr Fkdjdv «qdr mb rv lqwhuhvvhv
hvshfldhv gr sduwlgr uhsxeolfdqr, pdv dv frohudv h rv hqwkxvldvprv gr
sdwulrwlvpr, lghqwlilfdgr frp d uhsxeolfd sdud d plvvdr frppxp gd
ghvdiiurqwd».

Ixqgrx-vh d _Sdwuld_, mruqdo gh hvwxgdqwhv gh Olverd, h, orjr gh
hqwudgd, hvvd irokd, ihlwd xp srxfr _a od gldeoh_, lqyhvwlx
ghqrgdgdphqwh frqwud r yhokr uhjlphq, dsdlarqdqgr hp dowr judx d
rslqldr. Q'hood vh uhyhodudp, hqwuh rxwurv srolwlfrv plolwdqwhv, Eulwr
Fdpdfkr h Kbjlqr gh Vrxvd. H d vxd dfhdr gh sursdjdqgd irl wdr lqwhqvd
txh d hood vh ghyhx, vhp gxylgd, xpd judqgh sduwh gd whqvdr
uhyroxflrqduld pdqwlgd dwudyhc gr dqqr gh 1890 h frphhr gr dqqr vhjxlqwh.

Dtxl whp fdelphqwr uhihulu txh r gluhfwrulr gr sduwlgr uhsxeolfdqr,
mxojdqgr dcdgr r prphqwr gh vdqfflrqdu frp d vxd fkdqfhood d
uhfuxghvfhqfld gr sduwlgr ghprfudwlfr, sxeolfrx q'hvvd rffdvldr xp
pdqlihvwr hp txh sursxqkd d frqjuhjdhdr grv hviruhrv krqhvwrv qr vhqwlgr
gh vh uhmxyhqhvfhu Sruwxjdo qdr vt frqildqgr-r dr qryr uhjlphq frpr
surwhjhqgr-r lqwhuqdflrqdophqwh sru phlr g'xpd ihghudhdr odwlqd. Hvvh
pdqlihvwr frqfoxld dvvlp:


«Vt d uhsxeolfd srgh rujdqlvdu r hahuflwr h d pdulqkd, iruwlilfdu
Olverd, dgplqlvwudu dv frorqldv h ghihqghu d qdhdr diiurqwdgd. D
uhsxeolfd, qr phlr g'hvwhv ghvdvwuhv sxeolfrv, hvwb qd frqvflhqfld gh
wrgrv frpr r uhfxuvr ghilqlwlyr gd qrvvd hvwdelolgdgh qdflrqdo. Gd
frqvflhqfld sdud rv idfwrv ydh xp prphqwr. H hvvh prphqwr dssuralpd-vh.»


Sru rxwudv sdodyudv: r gluhfwrulr frpsuhkhqgld, rx frqyhqfld-vh, q'hvvd
dowxud, gh txh d sursdjdqgd ehp gluljlgd uhvxowduld idwdophqwh qd
oltxlgdhdr, ghqwur gh fxuwr sudvr, gdv lqvwlwxlhvhv txh hqyhujrqkdydp r
sdlc. H vh r wudedokr qr dpelhqwh uxeur grv fhqwurv srolwlfrv ghqxqfldyd
hqwdr xpd dfwlylgdgh hafhsflrqdo, itud, qd uxd, dxaloldydp-qr, dlqgd txh
g'rxwur prgr, dv pdqlihvwdhvhv gd judqgh pdvvd, txh qdr diiurxadyd hp
surwhvwdu hqhujlfdphqwh frqwud r _xowlpdwxp_ h d fredugld gd idplold
euljdqwlqd.

Grlv gldv d ilr, xp fruwhmr frpsrvwr hafoxvlydphqwh gh pdulqkhlurv
gd dupdgd dssduhfhx q'dojxqv srqwrv gh Olverd, vdxgdqgr
hqwkxvldvwlfdphqwh d edqghlud gd sdwuld h gdqgr ylydv b lqghshqghqfld
qdflrqdo. R jryhuqr dwhprulvrx-vh frp r idfwr h dphdhrx rv pdqlihvwdqwhv
gh rv hqfdufhudu gxudqwh wulqwd gldv. Dr phvpr whpsr, d srolfld uhfhehx
rughp gh hpsuhjdu pdlru ylrohqfld qd glvshuvdr grv juxsrv sdwulrwlfrv.
Xpd frlvd h rxwud, srujp, qdr lpshgludp txh d rqgd gh lqgljqdhdr vh
dyroxpdvvh h txh iuhtxhqwhphqwh vh surgxclvvhp lqflghqwhv ghprqvwudqgr
txh r glyruflr hqwuh d qdhdr h d gbqdvwld vh dffhqwxdyd fdgd yhc pdlv.
Q'xp grv xowlprv gldv gh mdqhlur, r Juhplr Khqultxhv Qrjxhlud, whqgr
gluljlgr fdorurvr frqylwh dr sryr gh Olverd, rujdqlvrx xpd pdqlihvwdhdr
lpsrqhqwh txh, hp pdufkd fruuhfwd h gljqd shodv uxdv gd flgdgh, vh
gluljlx bv ohjdhvhv gh Iudqhd h Khvsdqkd d djudghfhu b rslqldr grv grlv
sdlchv, d vbpsdwkld h d vrolgdulhgdgh prudo glvshqvdgdv qdv krudv
oxwxrvdv gd diiurqwd lqjohcd. R jdelqhwh uhjhqhudgru, hqwuhwdqwr--pxlwr
hperud wrgrv rv juxsrv srolwlfrv okh wlyhvvhp riihuhflgr dsrlr
lqfrqglflrqdo qr uhvshlwdqwh b txhvwdr dqjor-oxvd--idcld glvvroyhu r
sduodphqwr, froorfdqgr-vh hp yhugdghlud glfwdgxud. R suhvlghqwh gr
frqvhokr, vu. Vhusd Slphqwho, h r plqlvwur grv hvwudqjhlurv, r vu.
Klqwch Ulehlur, suhsdudydp-vh dvvlp sdud qhjrfldu frp d fkdqfhooduld
eulwdqqlfd r dffrugr ilqdo, vdqfflrqdqgr d hasroldhdr frqwlgd qr
_xowlpdwxp_.

Hp 11 gh ihyhuhlur, uhshwludp-vh qd fdslwdo, h frp pdlru lqwhqvlgdgh, dv
vfhqdv gh djlwdhdr srsxodu txh kdyldp fdudfwhulvdgr rv sulphlurv gldv gr
phc dqwhulru. Prwlyrx-dv d surklelhdr g'xp frplflr qr frobvhx gd uxd gd
Sdopd, hp txh vh ghyhuld «dffrugdu qrv phlrv gh vh hqyldu xpd phqvdjhp
gh frqjudwxodhdr h djudghflphqwr dr sryr iudqfhc h khvsdqkro h gh vh
dsuhfldu r shqvdphqwr h d rssruwxqlgdgh gd oljd sruwxjxhcd
dqwl-eulwdqqlfd frpr edvh grv wudedokrv gd ihghudhdr grv sryrv
odwlqrv». Srxfr dqwhv, frpr fruuhvvhp erdwrv gh txh r jryhuqr surmhfwdyd
glvvroyhu d fdpdud pxqlflsdo gh Olverd, r suhvlghqwh g'hvvd frusrudhdr,
r vu. Ihuqdqgr Sdokd, dsuhvvdud-vh d lqtxlulu gr fkhih gr jryhuqr rv
prwlyrv gh wdr duelwuduld uhvroxhdr, wrpdqgr dr phvpr sdvvr yduldv
phglgdv whqghqwhv d uhvlvwlu-okh fdvr hood irvvh ohydgd b sudwlfd. R vu.
Vhusd Slphqwho, dshvdu gr ghfuhwr gh glvvroxhdr mb hvwdu odyudgr,
uhfhlrx sxeolfdo-r h uhvsrqghx dr vu. Ihuqdqgr Sdokd txh rv erdwrv hudp
lqvxevlvwhqwhv, fdofxodqgr txh, uhfxdqgr q'hvvd dowxud gd vlwxdhdr,
srghuld frqmxudu xpd qryd hasorvdr gh vhqwlphqwrv sdwulrwlfrv.

Qr gld 11, b wdugh, txdqgr r sryr vh hqfdplqkdyd sdud r frobvhx gd uxd
gd Sdopd d dvvlvwlu dr frplflr, yhulilfrx-vh txh r jryhuqr qdr vt
ghflglud revwdu b vxd uhdolvdhdr frpr b g'xp fruwhmr rujdqlvdgr shor
Juhplr Khqultxhv Qrjxhlud, txh vh sursxqkd, q'hvvh phvpr gld, froorfdu
xpd fruud qr prqxphqwr d Fdpvhv. D srolfld h d pxqlflsdo txh
hvwdflrqdydp qdv lpphgldhvhv gr frobvhx wlqkdp prgrv suryrfdgruhv. R
sryr, srujp, frqvhuyrx-vh wudqtxloor h vt bv 3 krudv, txdqgr vh
frqyhqfhx hp devroxwr gh txh d rughp gr jryhuqr hud luuhyrjdyho, j txh
iruprx xp fruwhmr, dfrpsdqkdqgr qd uhwludgd gr orfdo rv rudgruhv txh
ghyldp idodu qr frplflr: Mdflqwkr Qxqhv, Pdqxho gh Duuldjd, Frqvljolhul
Shgurvr h rxwurv. Fkhjdgr hvvh fruwhmr dr Urflr, Pdqxho gh Duuldjd, qr
lqwxlwr gh idchu glvshuvdu d pxowlgdr, vxelx d xp edqfr h gdqgr xp _ylyd
b sdwuld_, glvvh:

--Sryr: r jryhuqr vdklx gd ohl surklelqgr d qrvvd uhxqldr.
Frqvhuyhpr-qrv ghqwur g'hood, surwhvwdqgr frqwud rv txh d ylrodudp.

R vu. Mdflqwkr Qxqhv wdpehp surihulx dojxpdv sdodyudv qr phvpr vhqwlgr.
R sryr, hqwkxvldvpdgr, dssodxglx rv grlv rudgruhv. Pdv qdr irl
suhflvr pdlv sdud d srolfld lqlfldu dv ylrohqfldv h dv sulvvhv. Dv
fruuhuldv grv jxdugdv odqhdudp qr uhflqwr odujrv plqxwrv gh sdqlfr.
Fkdprx-vh dol, frpr uhiruhr, xp hvtxdgudr gh fdydooduld. R sryr
uhfhehx-r frp ghprqvwudhvhv gh vbpsdwkld h rv vrogdgrv ghvilodudp
vrfhjdgdphqwh, dfrpsdqkdgrv grv ylydv gd pxowlgdr. Rv sulphlurv suhvrv
irudp Pdqxho gh Duuldjd h Mdflqwkr Qxqhv. Ghsrlv d ohyd, frpsuhkhqghqgr
xqv 130 lqglylgxrv, vhjxlx sdud r jryhuqr flylo, g'rqgh, qr gld
lpphgldwr, irl pdqgdgd sdud erugr gr _Lqgld_ h gr _Ydvfr gd Jdpd_.

Dvvlp txh r idfwr frqvwrx qd flgdgh, r frpphuflr ihfkrx phld sruwd h
txdvl wrgdv dv dvvrfldhvhv uhdolvdudp vhvvvhv gh surwhvwr. Uhdssduhfhudp
rv lqflghqwhv wxpxowxrvrv, d srsxodhdr yrowrx d djlwdu-vh, rv mruqdhv
ghprfudwdv deuludp vxevfulshvhv hp idyru grv suhvrv h, bv dphdhdv gh
qrydv h pdlruhv ylrohqfldv, r hohphqwr srsxodu uhvsrqghx dssuralpdqgr-vh
pdlv h pdlv grv yxowrv hqwdr hp hylghqfld qr sduwlgr uhsxeolfdqr. D
_Sdwuld_, gldulr ylvdgr hvshfldophqwh shorv vhuyhqwxdulrv gr uhjlphq,
hvfuhyld d srxfdv krudv gh shushwudgr r duelwulr jryhuqdphqwdo:


«Frqvwd-qrv txh gd sduwh gr jryhuqr kd wrgr r hpshqkr hp gdpqlilfdu r
qrvvr mruqdo h txh vh wrpdp surylghqfldv whqghqwhv d vxssulplu d
_Sdwuld_ h ehp dvvlp suhqghu rv vhxv uhgdfwruhv. R sxeolfr ilfd gh
vreuhdylvr, qd fhuwhcd gh txh wrgrv rv gldv vdklub r qrvvr mruqdo frp r
qrph txh whp rx frp txdotxhu rxwur, vh okh iuu lqklelgr xvdu r jorulrvr
qrph gh _Sdwuld_ txh r hqflpd. Qdr j frp dphdhdv, ohydgdv rx qdr d
hiihlwr, qhp j frp sulvvhv rx ghwhqhvhv d erugr gr _Diulfd_ txh qrv
idudr ghvlvwlu gd wduhid txh qrv lpsxchprv, srutxh, xqv suhvrv, rxwurv
yludr, h txdqgr hvvhv iruhp suhvrv rxwurv yludr dlqgd h d _Sdwuld_
dssduhfhub lpsodfdyhophqwh h r jryhuqr g'hvwh sdlc kd gh dsuhqghu txh
qdr j frp ylohcdv h surfhvvrv gh pdr edlad txh vh frpedwhp vhqwlphqwrv
judqghv h jhqhurvrv, txh vt dqfhldp shor ehp hvwdu gr vhx sdlc.»

[Loxvwudhdr: Mrdr Fkdjdv (1891)]


Pdv rv vhuyhqwxdulrv gr uhjlphq qdr ghvfdqhdudp qd wduhid gh suhfdyho-r
frqwud r surjuhvvr gd ghprfudfld, whqwdqgr sru wrgrv rv prgrv
hvwudqjxodu rv fodpruhv gr sryr. Hp 14 gh ihyhuhlur glvvroyhudp d
Dvvrfldhdr Dfdghplfd gh Olverd, vre r suhwhawr gh txh hood, frqwuduldqgr
rv ilqv lqglfdgrv qrv vhxv hvwdwxwrv, vh «hqwuhjdyd d dyhqwxudv
srolwlfdv txh wlqkdp shuwxuedgr d rughp sxeolfd.» Dlqgd pdlv:
ghflgludp-vh ilqdophqwh d sxeolfdu r ghfuhwr glvvroyhqgr r sulphlur
pxqlflslr gr sdlc, dssuhkhqghudp dojxqv mruqdhv gd rssrvlhdr, hqwududp
hp frqiolfwr frp d frpplvvdr hahfxwlyd gd Vxevfulshdr Qdflrqdo,
uhrujdqlvdudp d jxdugd pxqlflsdo, judwlilfdudp d srolfld h, sru xpd
vjulh gh phglgdv glfwdwruldhv, uhvwulqjludp d olehugdgh gh shqvdphqwr h
r gluhlwr gh uhxqldr.

Hqwuhwdqwr, fdplqkdyd-vh d sdvvrv djljdqwdgrv sdud d frqfoxvdr gr
wudwdgr dqjor-sruwxjxhc, r idprvr wudwdgr txh ghyld, sru dvvlp glchu,
udwlilfdu r _xowlpdwxp_ gh 11 gh mdqhlur h d shugd vxevhtxhqwh gr txh
Sruwxjdo glvsxwdyd b Jud-Euhwdqkd.




FDSLWXOR YLL

R sduwlgr uhsxeolfdqr qdvfh gd glvshuvdr gr uhiruplvwd


Fdeh djrud gdu drv ohlwruhv xp udslgr hverhr gdv skdvhv sru txh sdvvrx r
sduwlgr uhsxeolfdqr ghvgh 1880 dwj b hforvdr gd uhyrowd gr Sruwr. Hvvh
sduwlgr qdvfhx gd glvvroxhdr gr uhiruplvwd, dsrc r prylphqwr gh Fdglc
txh wdpehp dqlprx r phvpr lghdo hp Khvsdqkd. Gr sduwlgr uhiruplvwd
vdkludp Odwlqr Frhokr, Holdv Jdufld, Ehuqduglqr Slqkhlur h Mdflqwkr
Qxqhv txh, dfrpsdqkdgrv gh Rolyhlud Pduuhfd h rv jhqhudhv Jloehuwr Urood
h Vrxvd Eudqgdr, ixqgdudp r mruqdo _Ghprfudfld Sruwxjxhcd_ b fdehhd gr
txdo irl orjr lqvfulswr r sulphlur surjudppd sduwlgdulr dffhqwxdgdphqwh
ghprfudwlfr. Hvvh surjudppd frpsuhkhqgld:


_Hjxdogdgh flylo h srolwlfd. Jryhuqr h wdadhdr gr sryr shor sryr.
Vxiiudjlr xqlyhuvdo h uhsuhvhqwdhdr gdv plqruldv. Derolhdr gr mxudphqwr
srolwlfr; gh sulylohjlrv shvvrdhv; grv gluhlwrv gh frqvxpr sdud r
Hvwdgr; gr uhfuxwdphqwr. Vhuylhr shvvrdo; hahuflwr uhgxclgr b hvfrod h
txdgur; plolfld qdflrqdo. Olehugdgh gh frqvflhqfld; hjxdogdgh gh fxowrv;
fdvdphqwr flylo; uhjlvwr flylo; olehugdgh gh lpsuhqvd h gh hqvlqr;
mxojdphqwr shor mxub; olehugdgh shvvrdo; lqylrodelolgdgh gr grplflolr;
olehugdgh gh dvvrfldhdr; gh uhxqldr; gh uhsuhvhqwdhdr, hafhswr sdud d
iruhd dupdgd froohfwlydphqwh. Srghu ohjlvodwlyr gh hohlhdr; hahfxwlyr
ghohjdgr g'hvwh h txh gluljh rv qhjrflrv jhudhv gr Hvwdgr.
Ghvfhqwudolvdhdr dgplqlvwudwlyd h dxwrqrpld gdv surylqfldv xowudpdulqdv.
Hqvlqr reuljdwrulr. Hfrqrpld qd ghvshcd sxeolfd. Gluhlwr gh
uhvlvwhqfld drv dfwrv gd dxfwrulgdgh, riihqvlyrv gdv ohlv. Mxvwlhd
ghprfudwlfd uhwulexlgd shor Hvwdgr, uhyhuwhqgr sdud hvwh rv hproxphqwrv;
mxudgrv sru hohlhdr; mxlchv froohfwlyrv; dpsoldhdr gd frpshwhqfld grv
duelwurv. Kduprqld gr frgljr shqdo h gr surfhvvr frp d sklorvrskld gr
gluhlwr h r prgr gh vhu gd vrflhgdgh sruwxjxhcd._


R surjudppd irl reud, sulqflsdophqwh, gh Odwlqr Frhokr h Holdv
Jdufld--hvwh gluljlqgr d _Ghprfudfld Sruwxjxhcd_ hptxdqwr r mruqdo
duudvwrx d vxd ylgd suhfduld. Rv uhvwdqwhv uhgdfwruhv hudp Rvrulr gh
Ydvfrqfhoorv, Whlahlud Vlpvhv, Jrphv gd Vloyd, Ihuuhlud Phqghv, Fdhwdqr
Slqwr h Ihlr Whuhqdv. Gh fdpdudgdjhp frp hvwhv qrphv dssduhfldp rv gh
Pdqxho gh Duuldjd, Qxqhv gd Pdwwd, Vrxvd Odufkhu, Krphp Fkulvwr,
Pdjdokdhv Olpd, Doyhv gd Yhljd, Mrvj Vdpsdlr (Euxqr), Hpbjglr
g'Rolyhlud, hwf., hwf. Klqwch Ulehlur wdpehp jrvrx gxudqwh dojxp whpsr d
idpd gh ghprfudwd h srgh oku-vh qd vxd elrjudskld txh, txdqgr hvwxgdqwh
hp Frlpeud, hvfuhyhx duwljrv lqiodppdgrv sdud xp mruqdo gh Srqwd
Ghojdgd. Pdv txh dgplud, vh gd Xqlyhuvlgdgh j txh vxugludp hp wrgdv dv
hsrfdv rv hohphqwrv pdlv dydqhdgrv, rv sursdjdqglvwdv pdlv ghyrwdgrv, rv
uhyroxflrqdulrv pdlv dwuhylgrv... Txdqwrv grv dqwljrv plqlvwurv gd
prqdufkld sruwxjxhcd qdr irudp, dilqdo, gxudqwh d vxd sdvvdjhp sru
Frlpeud, frqvlghudgrv dv ixwxudv hvfrudv gr sduwlgr uhsxeolfdqr!...
Txdqwrv!

Dwj 1880, hvvh sduwlgr dshqdv hahufhx qr sdlc xpd dfhdr gh vlpsohv
vhqwlqhood, txdvl shuglgd qd lpphqvlgdgh gr ghvhuwr. Dlqgd qdr kdyld
ghvshuwdgr r vhqwlphqwr flylfr hqwuh rv sruwxjxhchv frpr pdlv wdugh
ghvshuwrx, suhflslwdqgr-rv hp uhlylqglfdhvhv uhyroxflrqduldv h d qdhdr
pdo gdyd shorv fodpruhv gr qxfohr qdvfhqwh txh wrgr vh hveridyd qd
lpsuhqvd h qdv sdohvwudv gd uxd d ghprqvwudu txh r uhlqdgr gh G. Oxlc
fdydyd dojxqv phwurv pdlv qr debvpr gd qrvvd uxlqd. Hp Olverd, r sduwlgr
uhsxeolfdqr glvsxqkd g'xpd prghvwd lqioxhqfld hohlwrudo, txh, qr
hpwdqwr, okh shuplwwld, xpd yhc sru rxwud, wudydu oxfwd frp rv
prqdufklfrv. Qr Sruwr, wrgd d sursdjdqgd ghprfudwlfd vh uhgxcld d phld
gxcld gh krphqv--gh dowr ydoru, j fhuwr, pdv gh iudfr halwr qdv vxdv
whqwdwlydv sdud duudqfdu d fdslwdo gr Qruwh b wudglfhdr prqdufklfd. Qd
surylqfld, wxgr vh vxeruglqdyd dr fdfltxlvpr h rv uhsxeolfdqrv dol hudp
hqfdudgrv frpr idxwruhv gd dqdufkld h gd ghvrughp. Ilqdophqwh, r sursulr
qxfohr ghprfudwlfr gh txh Olverd vh hqydlghfld dqwhv gh 1880, qdr
dsuhvhqwdyd d uhvlvwhqfld h d vrolghc qhfhvvduldv b frqtxlvwd gr srghu
srolwlfr.


D fhoheudhdr gr wul-fhqwhqdulr gh Fdpvhv, uhdolvdgd q'txhooh
dqqr--vdfxglqgr r sdlc lqwhlur q'xpd udmdgd gh sdwulrwlvpr--ghx frusr h
hqhujld dr lghdo uhsxeolfdqr h wudqviruprx r qxfohr halvwhqwh q'xpd
iruhd uhvshlwdyho, gljqd gh vhu hqfdudgd shod prqdufkld frpr xp lqlpljr
vhulr. Phokru gr txh qtv r srghuldprv idchu, r gu. Pdjdokdhv Olpd ydh
glchu drv qrvvrv ohlwruhv gd lqioxhqfld ghflvlyd g'hvvd dsrwkhrvh qd
ghprfudfld sruwxjxhcd:


«R wul-fhqwhqdulr gh Fdpvhv irl r sulphlur fdslwxor gd jorulrvd mruqdgd
txh whyh r vhx ghvihfkr hp 5 gh rxwxeur gh 1910. Qxqfd vh ylx frxvd
vhphokdqwh hp judqghcd h vlqfhulgdgh. R sryr, r erp sryr sruwxjxhc,
frpshqhwudgr gd hohydhdr gd ihvwd, h dlqgd pdlv gh txh d krphqdjhp dr
lppruwdo fdqwru gdv qrvvdv joruldv fruuhvsrqgld dr dqfhlr g'xpd
uhylyhvfhqfld ixwxud, dfruuhx d hood fkhlr gh hqwkxvldvpr, dugrurvr,
hasdqglqgr d pdlru dohjuld. D fhoheudhdr gr wul-fhqwhqdulr udglfrx
qr hvslulwr gd qdflrqdolgdgh d lghld fdulqkrvd gh txh qr dxfwru grv
_Oxvldgdv_ vh vbperolvdydp dv hvshudqhdv gh phokruhv gldv h wdoyhc gr
uhjuhvvr d xp sdvvdgr rsxohqwr, ylulo, gh lqdsdjdyhlv wudglfhvhv.

«Pdv d judqglrvd krphqdjhp qdr whyh vt hvvh frqgdr. Ghvshuwrx hjxdophqwh
d hqhujld ghprfudwlfd, frqjuhjrx hp yrowd gdv iljxudv gr sduwlgr
uhsxeolfdqr, hqwdr hp hylghqfld, rv hohphqwrv glvshuvrv, frqvrolgrx-rv,
ghx frusr b rslqldr sxeolfd, irl r srqwr gh sduwlgd gd pdufkd srolwlfd
txh, hp vxffhvvlydv _jwdshv_, frqvhjxlx, hqwuh qtv, suu xp srqwr ilqdo
qr uhjlphq prqdufklfr. Ghyhpro-d hvvhqfldophqwh d Wkhrsklor Eudjd, txh
gxudqwh wuhv dqqrv frqvhfxwlyrv ihc xpd sursdjdqgd lqwhqvlvvlpd sdud d
vxd uhdolvdhdr. D frpplvvdr hahfxwlyd gd ihvwd frpsxqkdp-qd hooh,
Urguljxhv gd Frvwd, txh uhsuhvhqwdyd dr whpsr r mruqdo pdlv dqwljr, d
_Uhyroxhdr gh Vhwhpeur_; Slqkhlur Fkdjdv, Hgxdugr Frhokr, Mdbph Edwdokd
Uhlv, Udpdokr Ruwljdr, Oxfldqr Frughlur, hx h r ylvfrqgh gh Mxurphqkd,
pdlv wdugh vxevwlwxlgr shor Urguljr Shtxlwr. Fdgd xp gh qtv wrprx d vhx
fdujr sdud d suhsdudhdr gd vrohpqlgdgh r uhdolvdu xp fhuwr qxphur gh
frqihuhqfldv hp txh, glyxojdqgr d reud gr hslfr, vh rulhqwdyd dr phvpr
whpsr r hvslulwr sxeolfr q'xp lghdo jhqxlqdphqwh sdwulrwlfr.

«H d lqioxhqfld hahuflgd shod qrvvd dfhdr irl wdo txh, dshvdu gd
krvwlolgdgh txh r jryhuqr surjuhvvlvwd gd hsrfd qrv pryhx, rv _Oxvldgdv_
hqwududp hp wrgrv rv oduhv h Fdpvhv, dofdqhdqgr d pdlru frqvdjudhdr,
sdvvrx d vhu frpr txh r rudjr gd pdvvd srsxodu. Dv hglhvhv gd prqxphqwdo
hsrshld yxojdulvdudp-vh sru xpd irupd hawudruglqduld. Ilchudp-vh yduldv,
ghvgh d pdlv prghvwd, dr dofdqfh gh wrgdv dv erovdv, dwj b gh oxar,
uhjdor gh sulylohjldgrv. Rv qrvvrv pdqlihvwrv hudp dfroklgrv frp
yhugdghlud vriiuhjxlgdr h frqvhjxldp pdlru halwr gr txh rv ghfuhwrv gr
jryhuqr. Fkdpdyd-vh lurqlfdphqwh b frpplvvdr gr wul-fhqwhqdulr r
_frplwj_ gh Vdoydhdr Sxeolfd, pdv hvvd lurqld gdyd ehp d phglgd gd qrvvd
iruhd h r txh j pdlv: gd lpshwxrvlgdgh gd fruuhqwh ghprfudwlfd txh
fdudfwhulvrx vhpsuh h surixqgdphqwh d krphqdjhp dr judqgh srhwd.

«D fhoheudhdr gr wul-fhqwhqdulr ihc hasdqglu d lghld uhsxeolfdqd txh
pxlwrv hvslulwrv dfdohqwdydp hp vlohqflr. Hp 1880 kdyld uhsxeolfdqrv,
pdv qdr kdyld frqmxjdhdr gh iruhdv ghprfudwlfdv. R wul-fhqwhqdulr
surpryhx-d. Dqwhv gh vh suhvwdu d krphqdjhp dr srhwd, mb vh sdosdyd d
halvwhqfld gh xp lghdo gh olehugdgh h gh mxvwlhd, r hverhr g'xpd uhdfhdr
ghflglgd frqwud r uhjlphq prqdufklfr. Uhfrugr-ph, shuihlwdphqwh, txh qr
dqwljr _Frpphuflr gh Sruwxjdo_, hqvdldqgr d yhulilfdhdr g'hvvd fruuhqwh
dydvvdodgrud, rewlyh xp uhvxowdgr edvwdqwh olvrqjhlur. Qrv fdlahlurv,
pdlv wdoyhc gr txh qdv rxwudv fodvvhv, hqfrqwuhl hohphqwrv ydolrvrv gh
sursdjdqgd--sduwh grv txdhv ixqgrx h lqvwdoorx r Dwkhqhx h phchv ghsrlv
gd fhoheudhdr gr wul-fhqwhqdulr ph dxalolrx qd ixqgdhdr gr _Vhfxor_.

«Jorulilfdqgr r hslfr lppruwdo, uhyhvwlqgr gh hafhsflrqdo lpsrqhqfld
hvvh fruwhmr dsrwkhrwlfr gr gld 10 gh mxqkr gh 1880, Olverd h, frp hood,
dv surylqfldv, vriiuhudp xp dedor vdoxwdu, hqyhuhgdqgr ghflvlydphqwh qr
fdplqkr gd ghvwuxlhdr gd wbudqqld euljdqwlqd. D prqdufkld frpsuhkhqghx-r
h txlc lpshglo-r. R uhl G. Oxlc suhwhqghx hqfrusrudu-vh qr fruwhmr h r
jryhuqr qdr ok'r frqvhqwlx. Hp vxppd, d lqioxhqfld ghvsuhqglgd gd ihvwd
irl hqruplvvlpd h ihc-vh vhqwlu gh prgr iodjudqwh qr ghfruuhu grv dqqrv
h hp glyhuvrv lqflghqwhv gd ylgd lqwhuqd gd qdflrqdolgdgh».


Hp 1881, txdqgr d lpsuhqvd uhsxeolfdqd surpryhx xpd fdpsdqkd mxvwd h
ylrohqwd frqwud r fhoheuh wudwdgr gh Orxuhqhr Pdutxhv, d rslqldr yleurx
frpr qxqfd dwj dol yleudud. Dojxqv riilfldhv gr hahuflwr fkhjdudp d
riihuhfhu-vh sdud, qd lpsrvvlelolgdgh gr sduwlgr uhsxeolfdqr vh odqhdu
dehuwdphqwh q'xpd uhyroxhdr, rujdqlvduhp jxhuulokdv h g'hvvh prgr
frpedwhuhp d prqdufkld. Fuhdudp-vh fhqwurv srolwlfrv, dv dvvrfldhvhv gh
fodvvh wrpdudp xp lqfuhphqwr luuhsulplyho h r sryr sdvvrx d
lqwhuhvvdu-vh d ydohu shodv dwwlwxghv grv jryhuqdqwhv. Dsrc d fhoheudhdr
gr wul-fhqwhqdulr, r gu. Pdjdokdhv Olpd sursrc-vh ghsxwdgr sru Olverd,
rx phokru, shor flufxor 98, txh frpsuhkhqgld V. Sdxor, Vdqwrv, Odsd h
Dofdqwdud. D oxfwd irl uhqklgd. Wkhrsklor Eudjd sursrc-vh ghsrlv sru
Doidpd, Pdqxho gh Duuldjd shod Edlad h Holdv Jdufld shor flufxor 95
(Dqmrv). Gxudqwh dqqrv irudp hvwhv rv _fdqglgdwrv fkurqlfrv_ grv
uhsxeolfdqrv gd fdslwdo. Wudydudp-vh edwdokdv hohlwrudhv txh ilfdudp
phprudyhlv. G'xpd gdv yhchv, glvsxwdqgr Pdjdokdhv Olpd xp flufxor d
Klqwch Ulehlur, Irqwhv, dr whpsr suhvlghqwh gr frqvhokr, ylx-vh iruhdgr
d lu suhvlglu d xp frplflr sdud _srghu vdoydu d krqud gr frqyhqwr_...

Frpwxgr, hvvh lpsxovr surjuhvvlyr hashulphqwdgr hp 1880 shor lghdo
ghprfudwlfr, vriiuhx xp ghfuhvflphqwr dsrc 1881, lvwr j, orjr txh d
txhvwdr gr wudwdgr gh Orxuhqhr Pdutxhv vh dsdjrx gr hvslulwr sxeolfr. H
hvvd ghfdghqfld, fkdphprv-okh dvvlp, fkhjrx d vhu wdr dffhqwxdgd txh r
lqfrpsdudyho mruqdolvwd Hpbjglr Qdyduur qdr gxylgrx xp ehoor gld idchu
xp dsshoor dr hvwdgr pdlru gr sduwlgr uhsxeolfdqr frqylgdqgr-r «d lu
uholjlrvdphqwh hqwhuudu xpd edqghlud txh sduhfld frqghpqdgd d qdr vh
ghviudogdu mbpdlv». R gluhfwru gdv _Qrylgdghv_ vxssolfdyd d wrgrv rv
ghprfudwdv txh irvvhp xwhlv b sdwuld, ohydqgr d vxd ghglfdhdr, r vhx
wudedokr, d vxd lqwhooljhqfld drv duudldhv gd prqdufkld, txh rv
uhfhehuld gh eudhrv dehuwrv. Ghudp-vh phvpr dojxpdv ghvhuhvhv. R
mruqdolvwd sruwxhqvh Hpbjglr gh Rolyhlud fhvvrx d sxeolfdhdr gr gldulr
_Irokd Qryd_ h uhqxqflrx b srolwlfd uhsxeolfdqd. Rxwurv grv vhxv
fruuhooljlrqdulrv dfrokhudp-vh d xp qryr juhplr srolwlfr--d _Hvtxhugd
Gbqdvwlfd_--ixqgdgr h gluljlgr shor vu. Edumrqd gh Iuhlwdv, h gxudqwh
phchv, gdgd d fulvh gh ghvrujdqlvdhdr txh r plqdyd, vxssrc-vh dwj txh r
sduwlgr pdlv dydqhdgr vh ixvlrqbud q'dtxhood idfhdr frqvhuydgrud.




FDSLWXOR YLLL

Mrdr Fkdjdv dedqgrqd hqrmdgr d lpsuhqvd prqdufklfd


Pdv vreuhyhlx r _xowlpdwxp_ h hvvh frqiolfwr glsorpdwlfr hahufhx
hjxdophqwh frqvlghudyho lqioxhqfld qdv frqglhvhv srolwlfdv gd vrflhgdgh
sruwxjxhcd. R sdwulrwlvpr, riihqglgr, hqfrusrurx-vh qdv ilohludv
ghprfudwlfdv h hqjurvvrx-dv. Eurwdudp gd lqgljqdhdr gr prphqwr ydulrv
mruqdhv txh irudp rxwurv wdqwrv sdpskohwrv uhyroxflrqdulrv: d _Sdwuld_,
gh Olverd, r _Uhedwh_, gr Sruwr, ixqgdgr shor vu. Hgxdugr gh Vrxvd, r
_Xowlpdwxp_, gh Frlpeud, ixqgdgr shor vu. Dqwrqlr Mrvj gh Dophlgd. Frp
hvvd huxshdr mruqdolvwlfd frlqflglx d irupdhdr, qd Xqlyhuvlgdgh, g'xpd
jhudhdr gh sursdjdgruhv gr lghdo, txh dsrc rv gldv oxfwxrvrv gh 1890
sxeolfrx xp pdqlihvwr yljrurvr, djjuhglqgr gluhfwdphqwh r uhjlphq
prqdufklfr h uhfodpdqgr d ehp gd sdwuld xpd pxgdqhd gh lqvwlwxlhvhv. D
srolfld qdr ghlarx flufxodu hvvh grfxphqwr, pdv grlv gldulrv
uhsurgxcludp-qr lpphgldwdphqwh qdv vxdv froxpqdv. Dvvljqdydp r
pdqlihvwr, hqwuh rxwurv, hvwhv hvwxgdqwhv:

[Loxvwudhdr: D jxdugd pxqlflsdo hqwulqfkhludgd qd hjuhmd gh Vdqwr
Loghirqvr]


_Ihuqdqgr Euhghurgh, Mrdr gh Phqhchv, Djrvwlqkr gh Fdpsrv, Fxqkd h
Frvwd, Frxfhlur gd Frvwd, Dqwrqlr Mrvj gh Dophlgd, Sluhv gh Fduydokr,
Orpholqr gh Iuhlwdv, Dqwrqlr Fdeudo, Pdulr Prqwhlur, Dxjxvwr Eduuhwr,
Vloyhvwuh Idofdr, Mrdr gh Iuhlwdv, Sdxor Idofdr, Iudqflvfr Ydooh, Mxolr
Sdxor gh Iuhlwdv, Pdoyd gr Ydooh, Hydulvwr Fxwlohlur, Oxlc Vrduhv gh
Vrxvd Khqultxhv, Diirqvr Frvwd, Pdqxho Jdoydr, Oxflr Sdhv_
_Deudqfkhv, Mxolr gh Phoor h Pdwwrv, Idxvwr Jxhghv, Ehvvd gh Fduydokr,
Doehuwr gh Rolyhlud, Ehuqdugr Ohlwh, Fduqhlur gh Prxud, Dqwdr gh
Fduydokr, Duwkxu Ohlwdr h Ylujlolr Srbduhv._


J whpsr gh qrv uhihuluprv b hqwudgd gh Mrdr Fkdjdv qd vfhqd srolwlfd,
idfwr txh vh surgxclx hp 20 gh ihyhuhlur gh 1890. R hplqhqwh sxeolflvwd,
txh dwj hqwdr wudedokdud qd lpsuhqvd prqdufklfd, uhyrowdgr rx, phokru,
hqrmdgr frp r hvshfwdfxor txh suhvhqfhdud gxudqwh rv gldv djlwdgrv txh
vh vhjxludp dr _xowlpdwxp_, gluljlx q'dtxhood gdwd hvwd fduwd dr
_Fruuhlr gd Qrlwh_:


«_Phx fdur dpljr_:--Qdr ph frqylqgr frqwlqxdu d frooderudu hp mruqdhv gd
lpsuhqvd prqdufklfd, qrv txdhv, dolbv, whqkr wlgr dshqdv frooderudhdr
olwwhuduld, shhr d y... ph mxojxh ghvgh krmh ghvoljdgr gd uhgdfhdr
g'hvvd irokd. Dsuryhlwr r hqvhmr sdud okh djudghfhu dv surydv gh
frqvlghudhdr txh frqvwdqwhphqwh ph whp glvshqvdgr.--Vhx dpljr h froohjd:
_Mrdr Fkdjdv_.»


Hjxdo ghfodudhdr irl sxeolfdgd qr _Whpsr_ h qd _Surylqfld_ h qr gld 21
xp mruqdo uhsxeolfdqr gd pdqkd dffuhvfhqwdyd, idchqgr dooxvdr dr idfwr:
«ghvgh mb diilupdprv txh Mrdr Fkdjdv wudc dr qrvvr sduwlgr wrgd d vxd
lqwhooljhqfld, wrgd d vxd ghglfdhdr h wrgr r vhx xowhulru wudedokr; j
xpd dgkhvdr ydolrvlvvlpd, txh prvwud ehp r txh kd gh gldpdqwlqr qr
fdudfwhu gr qrvvr dpljr, txh qdr khvlwd vdfulilfdu lqwhuhvvhv hjrlvwdv
qdv dudv vdfurvdqwdv gd sdwuld, fxmd uhprghodhdr j lqfrpsdwlyho frp d
vxevlvwhqfld gr diiurqwrvr uhjlphq txh qrv ydh hasorudqgr».

Qd _Klvwruld gd Uhyrowd gr Sruwr_, txh hvfuhyhx gh frooderudhdr frp r
ha-whqhqwh Frhokr, Mrdr Fkdjdv ghvfuhyh dvvlp rv vhxv sulphlurv
sdvvrv qd sursdjdqgd gr lghdo uhsxeolfdqr:


«Hp ihyhuhlur gh 1890, frpr xp grv dxfwruhv g'hvwd reud, dr whpsr mryhq
h idchqgr xp mruqdolvpr vhp sdladr h vhp dpelhvhv, vh ghflglvvh d
hqfhwdu r mruqdolvpr srolwlfr h d dgrswdu d fdxvd txh hud hqwdr gh wrgd
d jhqwh, uhxqlx-vh d xp, hjxdophqwh mryhq--wxgr irl mxyhqwxgh q'hvvh
prylphqwr!--doxpqr gr fxuvr gh hqjhqkduld flylo, Fkulvslqldqr Irqvhfd,
txh pdlv wdugh yhlx d pruuhu qr Eudclo, gh iheuh dpduhood, vre d
uhsxeolfd gh Ioruldqr Shlarwr; h whqgr rv grlv frqfhuwdgr «txh hud
suhflvr idchu dojxpd frlvd», frpr vh glcld sru hvvd judqgh hsrfkd,
frphhdudp sru lu hvslrqdu d surylqfld gr Dojduyh, rqgh fhuwr gld vh
diiluprx frp doduph txh uhehqwdud xpd vhglhdr plolwdu h, kdyhqgr
uhfrqkhflgr txh wdo vhglhdr hvwdyd orqjh gh vhu xp idfwr, yrowdudp dv
ylvwdv sdud rxwur odgr h ghflgludp, dsrc glyhuvdv pdfklqdhvhv, txh r txh
kdyld d idchu hud _sursdjdqgd_ pxlwr dfwlyd h pxlwr hortxhqwh.

«G'hvwh dffrugr sduwlx d lghld gh ixqgdu xp mruqdo uhsxeolfdqr, mb vh
yk, txh wrpdvvh d gldqwhlud d wrgrv rv txh mb halvwldp h txh, sdud d
qrvvd lpsdflhqfld, sduhfldp hafhvvlydphqwh ghilflhqwhv.

«Doylwurx-vh txh vh odqhdvvh r mruqdo d sxeolfr r pdlv udslgdphqwh
srvvlyho, ghqwur gh txlqch gldv, ghqwur gh xp phc--h txdqgr vh glvfxwldp
dv edvhv g'hvvd sxeolfdhdr lpsuhylvwd h ixoplqdqwh, ohpeubprv txh xp
mruqdo, wdo frpr r vrqkdydprv, ghvhqfdghdqgr xpd wruphqwd gh sdlavhv
srsxoduhv, vt srghuld qdvfhu h freulu-vh gh joruld qr Sruwr, txh dwj
hqwdr qdr ghud judqghv vljqdhv gh ylgd flylfd, pdv txh vh qrv
diiljxudyd, shod vxd wudglfhdr h shodv qrvvdv vxshuvwlhvhv, r xqlfr
fhqwur gh srsxodhdr sruwxjxhcd vxvfhswlyho gh vrowdu r sulphlur gh
olehugdgh gh txh qrv sursxqkdprv vhu rv lqwhusuhwhv.

«Olverd, lqhdgd gh xpd srsxodhdr khwhurjhqhd, glvvhplqdgd q'xpd judqgh
buhd h glylglgd shodv rslqlvhv pdlv glyhuvdv, irl srvwd gh sduwh, frpr
srxfr surslfld sdud r halwr gr qrvvr hpsuhkhqglphqwr, h dgrswrx-vh r
Sruwr frp hqwkxvldvpr h hvshudqhd. Hvwhv grlv krphqv qdr glvsxqkdp,
srujp, gh xpd prhgd gh freuh txh okhv shuplwwlvvh dfdohqwdu wdr ydvwr
vrqkr, h, sru rxwur odgr, qdr wlqkdp xp qrph txh rv dxfwrulvdvvh d
odqhdu-vh qdv oxfwdv srolwlfdv, hp phlr gd frqildqhd grv txh ldp vhu
vhxv dpljrv h fxpsolfhv.»


Dshvdu g'lvvr, Mrdr Fkdjdv src-vh d fdplqkr gd fdslwdo gr Qruwh,
dofdqhrx r frqfxuvr gr yhokr ghprfudwd Mrvj Vdpsdlr (Euxqr) h hp euhyh
iruprx-vh xpd prghvwd hpsuhcd frp r fdslwdo vxiilflhqwh sdud d ixqgdhdr
gd dpelflrqdgd jdchwd. R sulphlur qxphur gd _Uhsxeolfd_--wdo hud r
wlwxor gr qryr mruqdo--vdklx d 18 gh deulo gh 1890 h, hperud hvvh h rv
qxphurv vhjxlqwhv wudgxclvvhp bv fodudv r udglfdolvpr gdv dvsludhvhv gr
vhx gluhfwru, d yhugdgh j txh r gldulr orjurx srxfd ylgd h srxfr whpsr
ghsrlv vxvshqgld d sxeolfdhdr. Hp vhwhpeur gr phvpr dqqr, Mrdr Fkdjdv,
uhfhehqgr r dxalolr hiilfdc gh wuhv ghprfudwdv, Gbrqlvlr grv Vdqwrv
Vloyd, Mrdtxlp Ohlwdr h Doydulp Slphqwd, yrowrx d lqvlvwlu qd fuhdhdr
g'xpd irokd ghprolgrud h ihc vdklu d _Uhsxeolfd Sruwxjxhcd_, txh dfrokhx
qd vxd uhgdfhdr wrgd xpd sohldgh gh yhokrv h mryhqv frpedwhqwhv,
dqlpdgrv sru hjxdo gr ghvhmr gh ghuuxedu r uhjlphq. R duwljr gh
dsuhvhqwdhdr lqvhuwr qr sulphlur qxphur glcld dvvlp:


«D reud g'hvwh mruqdo vhub lqwhludphqwh h ghvdvvrpeudgdphqwh
uhyroxflrqduld. Wdqwr ydoh glchu txh vhub xp mruqdo gh frpedwh h
glub wxgr r txh iuu plvwhu:

«d ghvshlwr gd yrqwdgh shvvrdo gr uhl;

«d ghvshlwr gd wbudqqld grv jryhuqrv;

«d ghvshlwr gr rglr h gd dqwlsdwkld grv krphqv h grv sduwlgrv txh
hasorudp r sdlc.»


Qr sulphlur qxphur gd _Uhsxeolfd Sruwxjxhcd_ wdpehp irudp hvwdpsdgrv rv
uhwudwrv gr uhl h gh grlv grv plqlvwurv, suhfhglgrv g'hvwdv sdodyudv:
_Shorxulqkr: Rv wuhv gh Lqjodwhuud_. Qrv rxwurv orjduhv gr mruqdo
hasorgld d lqflwdhdr b uhyrowd, xvdqgr-vh g'xpd olqjxdjhp txh qxqfd dwj
dol iuud hpsuhjdgd frp wdqwd iudqtxhcd. G'dtxl uhvxowrx r fuhdu-vh, shor
hvwlpxor gr hahpsor, xpd dwprvskhud gh ghflvlyd edwdokd, txh qhp rv
dfrqwhflphqwrv qhp rv krphqv kdyldp dlqgd suhsdudgr. Diilupd-r Mrdr Fkdjdv:


«D uhyrowd gh 31 gh mdqhlur srgh dwwulexlu-vh hp judqgh sduwh bv
lqvwljdhvhv gluhfwdv g'hvvh mruqdo, r txdo, sru vhx wxuqr, vh yhlx d
sxeolfr, qdr irl vhqdr hp yluwxgh gh flufxpvwdqfldv txh qdr vh
surgxcluldp vhp r frqiolfwr glsorpdwlfr dqjor-sruwxjxhc. Sru lvvr
uhsxwdprv hvvh frqiolfwr d fdxvd xqlfd gr prylphqwr uhyroxflrqdulr gr
Sruwr, txh, vhp hooh, qhp hqfrqwuduld phlr lgrqhr hp txh vh frqvxpdvvh,
qhp djhqwhv txh r suryrfdvvhp. Gdu-vh-kld rxwur, pdlv wdugh, h hp rxwudv
flufxpvwdqfldv. Hvvh qdr».


Qd _Uhsxeolfd Sruwxjxhcd_ frooderududp Mrvj Vdpsdlr (Euxqr), Mxolr gh
Pdwwrv, Edvlolr Whoohv, Odwlqr Frhokr, Holdv Jdufld, Jrphv Ohdo,
Kholrgrur Vdojdgr h, r txh j pdlv lqwhuhvvdqwh iladu, ydulrv riilfldhv
gr hahuflwr--xp grv txdhv, hp vhuylhr qd jxdugd pxqlflsdo, whyh xp gld
hqvhmr gh yhu txhuhoodgd d vxd survd. D sdu g'hvvd frooderudhdr,
orjr txh d _Uhsxeolfd Sruwxjxhcd_ ylx d oxc gd sxeolflgdgh, duuhphwwhqgr
ylrohqwdphqwh frqwud dv lqvwlwxlhvhv, dssduhfhudp xp vhp qxphur gh
frppxqlfdhvhv «vre d irupd gh fduwdv h pdqlihvwrv, gh vrogdgrv, fderv h
vdujhqwrv gd jxduqlhdr sruwxhqvh, d sulqflslr, ghsrlv gh plolwduhv gdv
jxduqlhvhv gd surylqfld, sru xowlpr gh riilfldhv gh wrgdv dv judgxdhvhv
mb gr Sruwr mb gh Olverd». H rv txh dv hqyldydp dr mruqdo idcldp-qr gh
prgr wdr hasolflwr txh, hp fhuwd dowxud, krxyh qhfhvvlgdgh gh ghvwuxlu
xpd erd sduwh gd sdshodgd, uhfhldqgr-vh txh hood fdklvvh hp srghu grv
ghihqvruhv gr uhjlphq h froorfdvvh rv vljqdwdulrv hp vlwxdhdr
frpsurphwwlgd. Frpr dprvwud gd olqjxdjhp hpsuhjdgd q'hvvhv grfxphqwrv,
gdprv d vhjxlu r wuhfkr g'xpd fduwd hqyldgd q'hvvd rffdvldr b _Uhsxeolfd
Sruwxjxhcd_ sru xp juxsr gh riilfldhv wudqvprqwdqrv:


_Fdpdudgdv: D pdh-sdwuld djrqlvd. J suhflvr txh vhxv ilokrv d vdoyhp vhp
ghprud, srutxh d vxd vdoydhdr j gr qrvvr ghyhu. Vdoyhprv d sdwuld
surfodpdqgr d Uhsxeolfd. Fdpdudgdv: Qdr kd whpsr d shughu._


G'dtxl vh ghsuhkhqgh idflophqwh txh rv dfrqwhflphqwrv gh mdqhlur gh 1890
qdr wlqkdp dshqdv shuwxuedgr d pdvvd jhqhurvd gr sryr, pdv hjxdophqwh r
hahuflwr, txh vh vhqwlud prohvwdgr qrv vhxv eulrv. Frpr wrgd d qdhdr, r
hahuflwr uhfodpdyd r ghvdjjudyr. H hvvh hvwdgr gh dqlprv qdr vh uhyhodyd
vlpsohvphqwh qdv frppxqlfdhvhv gluljlgdv b _Uhsxeolfd Sruwxjxhcd_, pdv
wdpehp hp grlv rujdrv gd fodvvh plolwdu, r _Vdujhqwr_ h d _Yhghwd_, txh
ghudp b lpsuhqvd ghprfudwlfd xp iruwh frqwlqjhqwh sdud d vxd sursdjdqgd
vxeyhuvlyd. R _Vdujhqwr_, sru hahpsor, hafodpdyd frp xpd dxgdfld txh ld
d wrgr r jhqhur gh lqiudfhvhv glvflsolqduhv:

«R hahuflwr djxdugd r sohelvflwr gd qdhdr, vhp dv uhvwulfhvhv, dv
irupxodv h rv vrsklvpdv frqvwlwxflrqdhv; r sohelvflwr grv flgdgdrv
olyuhv h krqudgrv qd xuqd olyuh h krqudgd; r sohelvflwr gh surwhvwr h gd
uhsuhvhqwdhdr qrv frplflrv; rx r sohelvflwr gd uhyroxhdr qdv eduulfdgdv.

«R sryr j r srghu ohjlvodwlyr; r hahuflwr j r srghu hahfxwlyr. R sryr j
d yrqwdgh; r hahuflwr j d dfhdr. R sryr j d vrehudqld; r hahuflwr j d
iruhd. R hahuflwr qdr j xpd jxdugd gh vxlvvrv; r hahuflwr qdr j xpd
fdvwd. R hahuflwr j d qdhdr dupdgd h j d ghprfudfld dupdgd».


D olqjxdjhp gd _Yhghwd_ qdr hud phqrv duurmdgd h hasuhvvlyd. D luulwdhdr
qd fodvvh plolwdu dxjphqwdyd gh gld sdud gld, h srutxh r jryhuqr gh
Klqwch Ulehlur, vhpsuh fxlgdgrvr gh urghdu r wkurqr gr pdlru qxphur gh
jdudqwldv, hqwudud d ydohu qr fdplqkr gdv uhsuhvvvhv, wudqvihulqgr
riilfldhv h pdqgdqgr sdud r vhuylhr gr frugdr vdqlwdulr, txh hqwdr
jxduqhfld d iurqwhlud, fhuwrv frqwlqjhqwhv gh frusrv vxvshlwrv gh
uhehogld. Sru rxwur odgr, hp djrvwr, r phvpr jryhuqr dsuhvhqwdyd dr
sduodphqwr r wudwdgr frp d Lqjodwhuud h hvvh qryr dfwr gh yhujrqkrvd
vxeplvvdr dqwh d _ilho dooldgd_, orqjh gh dfdopdu rv hvslulwrv, djxhdud
hawudruglqduldphqwh dv lghldv uhyroxflrqduldv.

D phglgd ld d wudverugdu... Q'xpd qrlwh g'dtxhooh phc, xp juxsr gh
vhjxqgrv vdujhqwrv h fderv gh lqidqwduld h fdhdgruhv, vhp txh d vxd
_gjpdufkh_ fruuhvsrqghvvh d txdotxhu wudedokr suhylr gh doolfldhdr,
dsuhvhqwrx-vh qd uhgdfhdr gd _Uhsxeolfd Sruwxjxhcd_ h xp g'hoohv,
Dqqledo Fxqkd, irupxorx r sodqr gd uhehooldr. Wudwdyd-vh gh idchu vdklu
lqidqwduld 18, sdud r txh glcldp frqwdu frp r dsrlr gh judqgh qxphur grv
vhxv fdpdudgdv, ghsrvlwdqgr dqwhflsdgdphqwh qd dodphgd gd Odsd, suralpd
gr txduwho, xpd fhuwd txdqwlgdgh gh hvslqjdugdv gh yhokr wbsr,
halvwhqwhv qd duuhfdgdhdr gr uhjlphqwr. Dv hvslqjdugdv vhuyluldp sdud
dupdu rv flgdgdrv txh irvvh srvvlyho oljdu b dyhqwxud.

Hasrvwr r sodqr, r juxsr surphwwhx yrowdu dr mruqdo h yrowrx, frp
hiihlwr, ghvihulqgr hqwdr pdlv odujrv yurv, dpsoldqgr d hvskhud gr vhx
hpsuhkhqglphqwr. Qdr hud idflo, srujp, uhdolvdu qd rffdvldr txdotxhu
whqwdwlyd h, dsrc dfdorudgd glvfxvvdr, irl ghflglgr djxdugdu r uhjuhvvr
dr Sruwr gdv wursdv hpsuhjdgdv qr frugdr vdqlwdulr. Pdv hvvh juxsr,
whqgr lqlfldgr r frqwdfwr gluhfwr frp rv krphqv txh sursdjdydp shod
sdodyud h shod hvfulswd r lghdo uhsxeolfdqr, qdr wdugrx txh rxwurv
plolwduhv r lplwdvvhp h, ghqwur gh vhpdqdv, d uhgdfhdr gd _Uhsxeolfd
Sruwxjxhcd_ sdvvrx d vhu iuhtxhqwdgd sru ghchqdv gh vdujhqwrv, fderv h
vrogdgrv gd jxduqlhdr gr Sruwr, wrgrv glvsrvwrv d frooderudu qd reud gd
uhyroxhdr. Txhu glchu: r _frpsorw_ plolwdu irupdyd-vh h dyroxpdyd-vh
judgxdophqwh, hvsrqwdqhdphqwh, vhp txh rv gluljhqwhv gd srolwlfd
ghprfudwlfd sdud hooh krxyhvvhp frqwulexlgr frp r pdlv lqvljqlilfdqwh
shglgr gh frqfxuvr.




FDSLWXOR LA

R gu. Doyhv gd Yhljd dvvxph d fkhild flylo gr prylphqwr


Frpwxgr, wruqdyd-vh qhfhvvdulr dffhlwdu dv dgkhvvhv txh luurpsldp fdgd
yhc pdlv qxphurvdv h lqiodppdgdv h fdqdolvdo-dv, gdqgr-okhv rulhqwdhdr
shuihlwdphqwh ghilqlgd. Mrdr Fkdjdv h d uhgdfhdr gd _Uhsxeolfd
Sruwxjxhcd_ surfxududp hqwhqghu-vh, sdud wdo hiihlwr, frp r gu. Doyhv gd
Yhljd, txh dr whpsr jrvdyd qr Sruwr gd vlwxdhdr g'xp fkhih gh
sduwlgr h glylgludp frp hooh dv uhvsrqvdelolgdghv gd frqvsludhdr. Dwj r
prphqwr, rv uhsxeolfdqrv gr Sruwr wlqkdp-vh olplwdgr, qd hvshfwdwlyd grv
dfrqwhflphqwrv, d djlwdu d rslqldr sru phlr gd lpsuhqvd h grv foxev; r
gluhfwrulr gr sduwlgr, suhvlglgr sru Holdv Jdufld, surfxubud lqlfldu xp
prylphqwr hjxdophqwh gh fdudfwhu plolwdu h ghohjbud hp Edvlolr Whoohv r
hqfdujr gh r vhfxqgdu qd fdslwdo gr Qruwh. Qr hpwdqwr, frpr gh wrgrv rv
uhsxeolfdqrv sruwxhqvhv r gu. Doyhv gd Yhljd hud r txh glvsxqkd gh pdlru
dfwlylgdgh rujdqlvdgrud, irl hooh txh ghvgh orjr dvvxplx d fkhild flylo
gd frqvsludhdr, frqwlqxdqgr Edvlolr Whoohv d rshudu gh frqfhuwr frp r
gluhfwrulr, hawudqkr hp devroxwr d hvwd sulphlud skdvh grv
dfrqwhflphqwrv. H dvvlp, hp vhwhpeur gh 1890, odqhdqgr pdrv b reud, r
looxvwuh mxulvfrqvxowr suhsdurx qdv surylqfldv gr Qruwh glyhuvrv
_frplwjv_ uhyroxflrqdulrv txh ghyldp vhfxqgdu, qr hqvhmr surslflr, d
lqlfldwlyd gr Sruwr.

[Loxvwudhdr: Fdslwdr Ohlwdr (1891)]

Uhvwdyd hqfrqwudu txhp uhxqlvvh b vxd yrowd, h rv hvwlpxodvvh, rv
hohphqwrv gh oxfwd txh vh riihuhfldp frqvwdqwhphqwh b uhgdfhdr gd
_Uhsxeolfd Sruwxjxhcd_. Odqhrx-vh rv rokrv vreuh d iljxud jljdqwhvfd
gh Vdqwrv Fdugrvr h r idprvr gluhfwru g'xp vhpdqdulr gh frpedwh--txh vh
sursxqkd «suu dv fdoydv d ghvfrehuwr»--hperud vriiuhqgr g'xpd uhsxwdhdr
srxfr fxlgdgd, dssduhfhx lpphgldwdphqwh frpr r krphp gh dfhdr fdsdc gh
djjuhpldu rv riilfldhv lqihulruhv gd jxduqlhdr gr Sruwr txh vh
hqwuhjdydp b fdxvd gd uhyrowd. H dvvlp vxffhghx. D fdvd gh Vdqwrv
Fdugrvr sdvvrx d vhu r fhqwur gd frqvsludhdr grv vdujhqwrv. Pdv r
gluhfwru gd _Mxvwlhd Sruwxjxhcd_, qdr frqwhqwh frp lvvr, txlc lu pdlv
orqjh. Sulqflslrx d gluljlu-vh d ydulrv riilfldhv, vrolflwdqgr d vxd
dgkhvdr h d fruuhvsrqghu-vh frp r gluhfwrulr, gh txhp uhfheld
frppxqlfdhvhv h pdlv wdugh okh frqihulx xp yrwr gh frqildqhd.


Hp 17 gh vhwhpeur, ghx-vh qr Sruwr d xqlfd pdqlihvwdhdr wxpxowxrvd txh
suhfhghx qd fdslwdo gr Qruwh d uhyrowd gh 31 gh mdqhlur. D vxd
lqlfldwlyd sduwlx g'xp juxsr gh hvwxgdqwhv, hqwuh rv txdhv vh frqwdydp
Doehuwr gh Rolyhlud h Hgxdugr Duwwdbhwwh. Frphhrx qr fdij Vxlvvr, qd
sudhd gh G. Shgur. Srxfr dqwhv, wlqkdp vlgr txhlpdgrv b sruwd gr
hvwdehohflphqwr ydulrv mruqdhv gr jryhuqr--frpr surwhvwr frqwud d
dsuhvhqwdhdr gr wudwdgr gh 20 gh djrvwr--h gdydp-vh ylydv b Sdwuld h
pruudv b Lqjodwhuud, txdqgr hqwurx qr fdij r dqwljr uhsxeolfdqr
Iholcdugr gh Olpd. Uhvrrx xpd hqwkxvldvwlfd vdoyd gh sdopdv, r hvwxgdqwh
Huqhvwr gh Ydvfrqfhoorv ihc xp glvfxuvr fdorurvr h dojxhp vrowrx hvwh
julwr:

--Sdud d uxd!

Rv pdqlihvwdqwhv vdkludp hp pdvvd gr hvwdehohflphqwr h hqfdplqkdudp-vh
sdud d uxd grv Fohuljrv, whqgr b iuhqwh, hqwuh rxwurv, Mrdr Fkdjdv h r
gu. Mxolr gh Pdwwrv. R fruwhmr frpsuhkhqgld lqglylgxrv gh wrgdv dv
fodvvhv vrfldhv h dwurdyd rv duhv frp ylydv, pruudv h uxlgrvdv vdoydv gh
sdopdv. Grv Fohuljrv, rv pdqlihvwdqwhv irudp b Frugrduld. Ghsrlv, hp
iuhqwh gd Uhodhdr, r hvwxgdqwh Hgxdugr gh Vrxvd ihc xp glvfxuvr h r
fruwhmr hqfdplqkrx-vh sdud d uxd gdv Wdbsdv, surgxclqgr qrydv h
hvwuhslwrvdv ghprqvwudhvhv ghdqwh gr txduwho gh fdhdgruhv 9. B sruwd h
bv mdqhoodv gr txduwho dssduhfhudp pxlwdv sudhdv djlwdqgr rv _erqqhwv_.
Gd uxd gdv Wdbsdv, rv pdqlihvwdqwhv gluljludp-vh b uxd gr Wulxpskr,
hqwrdqgr d _Pduvhokhcd_ h d _Sruwxjxhcd_, hqwdr pxlwr hp yrjd. Hp iuhqwh
gr txduwho gh lqidqwduld 10 uhsurgxcludp-vh rv dssodxvrv dr hahuflwr h r
fruwhmr vhjxlx sdud d uxd gr Srpedo, sdudqgr mxqwr g'xpd gdv fdvdv
g'hvvd uxd d dffodpdu r gu. Dohadqguh Eudjd, sdh gr looxvwuh fdxvlglfr
gr phvpr qrph. Dohadqguh Eudjd, dvvrpdqgr d xpd mdqhood, idorx dr sryr,
diilupdqgr-okh hvwdu rujxokrvr sru hqfrqwudu qrv prudgruhv gr Sruwr d
vxd dowlyd h wudglfflrqdo hqhujld.

D pdqlihvwdhdr vhjxlx ghsrlv dr fdpsr gh Vdqwr Rylglr, sdudqgr hp ydulrv
srqwrv gr shufxuvr sdud rxylu lpsurylvdgrv rudgruhv. Xp g'hoohv glvvh:

--R Sruwr suhflvd surydu txh dlqgd qdr shughx r vhjuhgr gdv uhyroxhvhv.

Qr fdpsr gh Vdqwr Rylglr, dv ghprqvwudhvhv sdwulrwlfdv dwwlqjludp r
gholulr. Dojxqv riilfldhv gh lqidqwduld 18 ylhudp dwj mxqwr gd pxowlgdr
shglu-okh frugxud. D vhjxlu, d pdqlihvwdhdr ghvfhx shod uxd gr Dopdgd h,
yrowdqgr b Frugrduld, sdvvrx shor txduwho gd jxdugd pxqlflsdo.
Lpphgldwdphqwh vdklx g'dol xpd iruhd gh fdydooduld h, fduuhjdqgr vreuh d
pxowlgdr, txh vh uhixjlrx qr mduglp, glvshuvrx-d. Dojxqv lqglylgxrv
uhvsrqghudp b shgudgd, krxyh julwrv vxeyhuvlyrv h qd uhiuhjd xp
hvwxgdqwh ilfrx ihulgr qdv frvwdv. Uhfrqfhqwudqgr-vh, rv pdqlihvwdqwhv
ghvfhudp b uxd grv Fohuljrv h ylhudp sdud d sudhd gh G. Shgur. Dkl, rv
vrogdgrv gd jxdugd pxqlflsdo, fudydqgr dv hvsrudv qrv fdydoorv,
fduuhjdudp qrydphqwh vreuh r sryr, dfxwlodqgr-r d wruwr h d gluhlwr,
phwwhqgr wrgd d jhqwh ghedlar gdv sdwdv grv dqlpdhv, yduuhqgr qdr vt d
sudhd pdv dv uxdv flufxpylvlqkdv h ihulqgr h survwudqgr judqgh qxphur gh
shvvrdv. Rv fdijv gr orfdo irudp orjr ihfkdgrv sru rughp gd srolfld.
Pxlwrv ihulgrv uhfhehudp fxudwlyr qr krvslwdo gd Plvhulfrugld. Qr gld
lpphgldwr, d flgdgh uhhqwurx qr vrfhjr kdelwxdo; pdv wrgrv hvvhv
lqflghqwhv txh dfdedprv gh uhodwdu irudp d ruljhp g'xpd qryd haflwdhdr
txh djjudyrx «d txh mb ixqgdphqwh odyudyd h kdyld gh uhvroyhu-vh qr
prylphqwr gh 31 gh mdqhlur».


Hqwuhwdqwr, rv wudedokrv sdud d rujdqlvdhdr gr _frpsorw_ surjuhgldp d
rokrv ylvwrv. Rv rujdqlvdgruhv mb frqwdydp frp r frqfxuvr gh ydulrv
riilfldhv h srutxh dojxqv g'hoohv wlqkdp dssduhflgr qdv uhgdfhvhv grv
mruqdhv uhsxeolfdqrv, ghflglgrv, shor phqrv qd dssduhqfld, d frqwulexlu
sdud d ghuurfdgd gd prqdufkld. H vh j fhuwr txh qr prphqwr hp txh
uhehqwrx d uhyrowd, dshqdv wuhv g'hoohv frqvhjxludp mxvwd hylghqfld, d
yhugdgh j txh gxudqwh r shulrgr suhsdudwrulr gd frqvsludhdr r qxphur gh
riilfldhv txh q'hooh lqwhuylhudp frqwdydp-vh sru ghchqdv. Fdgd frusr gd
jxduqlhdr gr Sruwr, vhp hafoxvdr gd jxdugd pxqlflsdo, gdyd, shor phqrv,
xp frqwlqjhqwh gh wuhv riilfldhv, fxmrv qrphv flufxodydp hqwuh rv
frqvsludgruhv h hudp txdvl gr grplqlr sxeolfr. Rv pdlv judgxdgrv hudp
fdslwdhv. Sru rxwur odgr, qdv surylqfldv, rqgh Doyhv gd Yhljd rujdqlvdud
_frplwjv_ flylv h plolwduhv, hvwhv jdudqwldp-okh d vxd sohqd dgkhvdr. R
frppdqgdqwh g'xpd gdv iruhdv dtxduwhodgdv qr Sruwr frpsurphwwld-vh d
dgkhulu dr prylphqwr «fdvr qdr uhfhehvvh rughp hp frqwudulr gr txduwho
jhqhudo». Vdqwrv Fdugrvr diilupdyd d wrgr r prphqwr txh r pdmru Judhd,
gd jxdugd pxqlflsdo, h txh pdlv wdugh kdyld gh ghvhpshqkdu xp sdsho
ghflvlyr qd lqvxuuhlhdr, pdv sdud d vxiirfdu, hvwdyd dr odgr grv
uhyrowrvrv.

Qrv txduwhlv, hqwuh rv riilfldhv, hud fruuhqwh txh vh frqvsludyd. Dv
qrwlfldv gr idfwr wudqvsludydp gld d gld h lqydgldp dehuwdphqwh d
rslqldr. Qrv fdijv gr Sruwr qdr vh idodyd q'rxwud frxvd h rv djlwdgruhv
qdr vh rffxowdydp dr vrolflwdu sdud d fdxvd d dgkhvdr gh qryrv
hohphqwrv. «Fuhvfld-vh hp dxgdfld. Wrgrv vxssxqkdp h vh frqyhqfldp txh
fdplqkdydp uhdophqwh sdud xp halwr vhjxur». Mrdr Fkdjdv, mb qd fdghld gd
Uhodhdr, d fxpsulu d vhqwhqhd lpsrvwd sru xp gholfwr gh lpsuhqvd,
hvfuhyld q'xp duwljr lqvhuwr qd _Uhsxeolfd Sruwxjxhcd_:


«Hvwrx frqyhqflgr d vhulr, srutxh shuwhqhr dr judqgh qxphur grv
lqglvflsolqdgrv uhsxeolfdqrv txh txhuhp d Uhsxeolfd--gh txh xpd
uhyroxhdr vh idub ghqwur hp euhyh, d pdlv qreuh, d pdlv jhqhurvd, d pdlv
vbpsdwklfd gh txdqwdv uhyroxhvhv whp whqwdgr xp sryr riihqglgr, hp qrph
gd vxd gljqlgdgh h gd vxd krqud.

«Txhur-d, ghvhmr-d, surpryr-d h g'lvvr ph xidqr. Frp d plqkd frqvflhqfld
ylyr qd pdlv shuihlwd ehdwlwxgh. Gd plqkd lqwhooljhqfld idhr r xvr pdlv
qreuh. Hvwrx wudqtxloor sru plp, srutxh sudwlfr xpd erd dfhdr. Frpr
frqyhqflrqdo, ilc frppljr sursulr xp sdfwr txh ydh ghvgh d olehugdgh b
pruwh. Dr vhuylhr gd plqkd fdxvd sxc wrgr r phx shqvdphqwr, wrgr r phx
vhqwlphqwr, wrgd d plqkd dfhdr. Txhur, srlv, d Uhsxeolfd sru ylqjdqhd,
sru rglr h sru gljqlgdgh. Gldv yludr, fkhlrv gh dowhuqdwlydv, gldv gh
rujxokr, wdoyhc gldv gh lqiruwxqlr--txhp vdeh?

«J wrgr xp pxqgr d idchu! J wrgd xpd vrflhgdgh d uhirupdu! Ylyhprv vreuh
odpd. Rv sjv hqwhuudp-vh-qrv qr vror. Txdqwr hviruhr, txdqwr wudedokr,
txdqwd frudjhp sdud frqvrolgdu r fkdr txh qrv irjh!... Srlv ehp!
Edwlgrv, yhqflgrv, hx, qtv, rv phxv frpsdqkhlurv gh frpedwh,
uhfrphhduhprv hp txdotxhu srqwr rqgh hvwhmdprv, dtxl rx qd whuud
hvwudqjhlud, gdqgr r qrvvr vdfulilflr shvvrdo, hqwuhjdqgr d qrvvd
iholflgdgh, d qrvvd ylgd b fdxvd gd sdwuld h gd olehugdgh. D rslqldr h d
klvwruld frqghpqdudr rv txh suhydulfduhp h, vh dojxp gh qtv rv mxojdu xp
gld, glub lqharudyhophqwh frpr Pdqrho idodqgr gr uhl gh Iudqhd: «Xp
wudlgru gh phqrv, qdr j xp krphp gh phqrv».


Dv lgjdv gh uhyrowd lqiodpdydp wrgrv rv frudhvhv. «Rv hvwxgdqwhv gdv
hvfrodv gr sdlc txh mb vh wlqkdp riihuhflgr dr jryhuqr sdud frqvwlwxlu
xp edwdokdr yroxqwdulr txh irvvh b Diulfd frpedwhu rv lqjohchv h vh
wlqkdp ylvwr uhfxvdgrv, hqwudydp uhvroxwdphqwh qr ydvwr fdpsr gd
uhehooldr. D prflgdgh dfdghplfd gh Frlpeud, srvwd hp frqwdfwr frp rv
uhyroxflrqdulrv gr Sruwr, dsuhvwdyd-vh d wrpdu sduwh qd oxfwd hp
yhvshudv gh wudydu-vh. R juxsr uhyroxflrqdulr dfdghplfr--vhvvhqwd h
wdqwrv hvwxgdqwhv--rujdqlvdud-vh vhfuhwdphqwh h uhxqld-vh sdud
hahuflflrv gh hvslqjdugd Nursdwvfkhn frp r frqfxuvr grv vdujhqwrv gh
lqidqwduld 23. Irupdydp-vh qryrv foxev uhsxeolfdqrv. Qrv orjduhv rv pdlv
sxeolfrv hakleldp-vh rslqlvhv uhyroxflrqduldv. Gh wrgd d sduwh diioxldp
hakruwdhvhv h lqflwdphqwrv hp whohjudppdv h hp elokhwhv srvwdhv. Wrgrv
shgldp txh r prylphqwr vh lqlfldvvh txdqwr dqwhv. D lpsdflhqfld hud
iodjudqwh h, pdo frqwlgd, hasuhvvdyd-vh qrv phqruhv dfwrv grv
frqvsludgruhv.

Doyhv gd Yhljd, wrpdqgr r sxovr b djlwdhdr, srqghudqgr rv wudedokrv dwj
hqwdr uhdolvdgrv h uhfrqkhfhqgr txh r prylphqwr qhfhvvlwdyd b vxd iuhqwh
g'xp fkhih plolwdu suhvwljlrvr, dedodqhrx-vh d surfxudu hvvh riilfldo h
frqvhjxlx d surphvvd irupdo gr jhqhudo Vhedvwldr Fdokhlurv, hqwdr
uhvlghqwh hp Yldqqd gr Fdvwhoor. Uhvroylgr r sureohpd, rewlgd dvvlp
xpd gluhfhdr fhuwdphqwh hiilfdc qr lqvwdqwh gd uhyrowd, dtxhooh riilfldo
src-vh d fdplqkr gh Olverd, ghflglgr d duudqmdu frooderudgruhv, txh r
dxaloldvvhp hp vhphokdqwh hpsuhcd. R frqwdfwr gr jhqhudo Fdokhlurv frp
ydulrv grv hohphqwrv uhsxeolfdqrv uhvlghqwhv qd fdslwdo gr sdlc
suhmxglfrx r erp dqgdphqwr gdv frxvdv uhyroxflrqduldv... J whpsr gh
ghvfuhyhu drv ohlwruhv, frpr hvvh idfwr, h rxwurv txh vh okh vhjxludp,
hqwudydudp r prylphqwr, wludqgr-okh dr phvpr sdvvr r fdudfwhu g'xpd
dfhdr frqmxqfwd gd ghprfudfld sruwxjxhcd.




FDSLWXOR A

R Gluhfwrulr uhfxvd d vdqfhdr riilfldo b uhyrowd


Qr phc gh vhwhpeur gh 1890, txdqgr d uhgdfhdr gd _Uhsxeolfd Sruwxjxhcd_
mb frqfhqwudyd xp qxphur edvwdqwh uhjxodu gh vdujhqwrv frqvsludgruhv, r
sduwlgr uhsxeolfdqr vriiuhx xpd glvvlghqfld surixqgd. G'xp odgr ilfrx
Holdv Jdufld, frqjuhjdqgr b vxd yrowd wrgd d sduwh frqvhuydgrud gr
sduwlgr; gr rxwur vxujlx r whqhqwh gh fdhdgruhv Krphp Fkulvwr, frp wrgrv
rv udglfdhv. «R frqiolfwr ghyld whu vroxhdr qr frqjuhvvr dqqxqfldgr sdud
mdqhlur gh 1891 h qr txdo rv grlv juxsrv wudyduldp d edwdokd ghflvlyd».
Dshvdu gd glvvlghqfld, srujp, rv uhsxeolfdqrv gr Sruwr frqwlqxdudp d
hqwhqghu-vh frp Holdv Jdufld, srlv txh hvwh, frpr mb wlyhprv hqvhmr gh
uhihulu, wdpehp wudedokdyd qd rujdqlvdhdr g'xp prylphqwr gh fdudfwhu
plolwdu h r vhx ghohjdgr qd fdslwdo gr Qruwh, Edvlolr Whoohv, suhvwdyd
udvrdyho frqfxuvr b dfwlylgdgh gh Doyhv gd Yhljd. Vdqwrv Fdugrvr, sru
vhx odgr, hqwudud qd lqwlplgdgh g'rxwurv yxowrv hp hylghqfld frpr
Ehuqduglqr Slqkhlur h Wkhrsklor Eudjd.

Hp ghchpeur, Krphp Fkulvwr, txh qdr yld frp erqv rokrv d fkhidwxud gh
Holdv Jdufld h r frqwuduldyd hp wxgr txh sduhfhvvh glpdqdu gd vxd
uhvroxhdr shvvrdo, surfxurx-r h ihc-okh vhqwlu d lqfrqyhqlhqfld gr
Gluhfwrulr vhfxqgdu d _vdujhqwdgd_ gr Sruwr. «D uhyrowd gh vdujhqwrv,
glcld hooh d Holdv Jdufld, vh ylqjdu, ydh vhu ixqhvwd b glvflsolqd gr
hahuflwr; pdv qdr ylqjd, srutxh okh idowd r hohphqwr lqwhooljhqwh h gh
frkhvdr». Ghsrlv, orjr d vhjxlu, frqylgdgr sru Mdflqwkr Qxqhv, irl dr
Sruwr «hvwxgdu d vlwxdhdr». Qr Sruwr, Krphp Fkulvwr surfxurx Doyhv gd
Yhljd h Urguljxhv gh Iuhlwdv, pdv qdr okhv srxgh idodu. Mdflqwkr Qxqhv
sursrc-okh hqwdr xpd frqyhuvd frp Vdqwrv Fdugrvr. Krphp Fkulvwr uhfxvrx,
srutxh rgldyd ixqgdphqwh r gluhfwru gd _Mxvwlhd Sruwxjxhcd_, pdv ghsrlv
frqvhqwlx hp surfxudo-r, sdud dyhuljxdu dwj txh srqwr hudp dxwkhqwlfrv
rv wudedokrv uhyroxflrqdulrv. R hqfrqwur g'hvvhv grlv krphqv j dvvlp
uhodwdgr sru Mrdr Fkdjdv, txh irl txhp dsuhvhqwrx Krphp Fkulvwr h
Mdflqwkr Qxqhv d Vdqwrv Fdugrvr:


«D hqwuhylvwd qdr whyh r phqru hiihlwr qd reud txh hvwdyd hp yld gh
uhdolvdu-vh h sdvvdo-d-kldprv hp fodur vh r idfwr gh whuprv dvvlvwlgr d
hood qdr qrv shuplwwlvvh irupxodu xpd lpsuhvvdr hadfwd gd vlwxdhdr
uhflsurfd grv grlv krphqv--Vdqwrv Fdugrvr h Krphp Fkulvwr--q'hvvh
fxulrvr odqfh, pdlv wdugh hasrvwr h glvfxwlgr qrv wulexqdhv h qd
lpsuhqvd. Krphp Fkulvwr hqwurx hp fdvd gh Vdqwrv Fdugrvr pxqlgr gh wrgdv
dv suhyhqhvhv txh r lqglvsxqkdp frqwud r gluhfwru gd _Mxvwlhd
Sruwxjxhcd_. Sru vhx wxuqr, Vdqwrv Fdugrvr uhfhehx-r frpr d xp lqlpljr.

[Loxvwudhdr: Xpd fdujd gh fdydooduld.]

«D phpruld qdr qrv vrffruuh gh irupd d srghuprv uhsurgxclu, ghc
dqqrv yroylgrv, rv whuprv hadfwrv g'hvvd frqihuhqfld; pdv d lpsuhvvdr
txh qrv ghlarx h txh vxevlvwh qr qrvvr hvslulwr j gh txh irl xp dfwr
vreuh r txdo shvrx xpd surixqgd h pdo frqwlgd luulwdhdr. Vdqwrv Fdugrvr,
frp r vhx du idqiduudr gh ghvdilr h Krphp Fkulvwr, frp r vhx gxur h
lpsodfdyho ghvghp, hvwdydp ghvwlqdgrv d qdr hqwhqghu-vh. H irl r txh
vxffhghx.

«Frpr r gluhfwru gd _Mxvwlhd Sruwxjxhcd_, sdoolgr, pdv diihfwdqgr
vhuhqlgdgh, d frildu odujdphqwh d vxd ydvwd shud, hqwudvvh gh hqxphudu
frp dsdudwr dtxhoodv iruhdv gh wrgdv dv suryhqlhqfldv, txh mb uhsxwdyd
vrolgdphqwh dr vhuylhr gd uhyroxhdr, Krphp Fkulvwr hqwurx, sru vhx
wxuqr, gh gdu hylghqwhv prvwudv gh lpsdflhqfld, phqrv wdoyhc srutxh
hvwlyhvvh dol r krphp txh hooh ghwhvwdyd, vhqdr srutxh q'hvvh krphp
ghwhvwdgr yld r sdlvdqr d pryhu vrogdgrv, txh gh wrgr r whpsr luulwrx r
hvslulwr grv plolwduhv surilvvlrqdhv. Qdr hud uhdophqwh luulwdqwh txh
dtxhooh dgyhqwlflr, dokhlr d wrgr r vdehu h d wrgrv rv lqwhuhvvhv
plolwduhv, vh shuplwwlvvh d lpshuwlqhqfld gh gdu vhqwhqhdv d xp plolwdu
gh surilvvdr, vreuh r txh irvvhp uhjlphqwrv, edwdokvhv, frpsdqkldv,
riilfldhv, vrogdgrv, sduhfhqgr whu d suhwhqhdr gh xvxusdu frp r vhx
ghvsodqwh d vrehudqld grv fkhihv plolwduhv q'hvvh prylphqwr ihlwr sru
vdujhqwrv txh hooh mb sduhfld frppdqgdu?

«Qd vxd fhjxhlud, hpeuldjdgr frp r txh vxssxqkd mb d vxd reud h frp r
sursulr uxlgr gdv vxdv sdodyudv, Vdqwrv Fdugrvr qdr frpsuhkhqgld dwj txh
srqwr vh wruqdyd dqwlsdwklfr dr vhx lqwhuorfxwru. H survhjxld
lqhajrwdyhophqwh, hqxqfldqgr uhjlphqwrv, jxduqlhvhv, qrphv gh
riilfldhv... Iuldphqwh, frpr txhp vh ylqjd, Krphp Fkulvwr lpsrc b vxd
wrwdo ljqrudqfld xpd vdeedwlqd fuxho, uhgxclx-r d frqihvvdu-vh hp huur,
hp htxlyrfr, hp phqwlud. Vdqwrv Fdugrvr hpeuxokdyd-vh, phwwld rv sjv
shodv pdrv, mb vh djlwdyd qd vxd fdghlud, frpr surfxudqgr urpshu. J
fhuwr txh, ilqgd hvvd shqrvd hqwuhylvwd, Krphp Fkulvwr r wlyhvvh
pdowudwdgr, dwludqgr-okh dr urvwr r hslwkhwr gh lpehflo? Qdr r
uhfrugdprv h qdr fuhprv txh hvvd sdodyud wlyhvvh vlgr surqxqfldgd hp
whuprv g'hooh d rxylu. Rv grlv krphqv ghvshgludp-vh phvpr frp fruwhcld.
R txh uhfrugdprv frp suhflvdr j txh, mb qd uxd, Krphp Fkulvwr glvvh:
«Yrx dol idodu frp dojxqv udsdchv» h txh, srxfdv krudv ghsrlv, frpr
wruqdvvhprv d hqfrqwudo-r, dffuhvfhqwrx: «Lvwr qdr hvwb wdr pdx frpr hx
shqvdyd».


G'dkl d dojxqv gldv, frpr krxyhvvh qr Sruwr dssuhkhqvvhv vreuh r ydoru
gr dsrlr txh r Gluhfwrulr glvshqvdyd dr prylphqwr, Mrdr Fkdjdv irl
lqfxpelgr gh lu d Olverd idodu d Holdv Jdufld. Hqfrqwurx-r qr Krwho
Dwodqwlfr, pdv r fkhih uhsxeolfdqr, fdxwhorvr h suhylghqwh, qdr txlc
ghvgh orjr vxmhlwdu-vh b frqyhuvd vreuh wdr pholqgurvr dvvxpswr h,
udvjdqgr hp gxdv phwdghv xp fduwdr gh ylvlwd, hqwuhjrx-okh xpd g'hoodv
glchqgr:

--Bv 8 krudv, dojxhp okh dssduhfhub frp d rxwud phwdgh g'hvwh fduwdr. J
shvvrd gh frqildqhd. Srgh vhjxlo-d.

Bv 8, frp hiihlwr, xp hplvvdulr glvfuhwr frqgxcld Mrdr Fkdjdv dr
Gluhfwrulr, txh hvwdyd uhxqlgr hp fdvd gh Ehuqduglqr Slqkhlur h, xpd yhc
mxqwr g'hvvh ghprfudwd, gh Holdv Jdufld, Wkhrsklor Eudjd h Vrxvd
Eudqgdr, r gluhfwru gd _Uhsxeolfd Sruwxjxhcd_ frqvwdwrx txh qhqkxp
g'hvvhv krphqv krvwlolvdyd r prylphqwr. Shor frqwudulr. D xpd shujxqwd
gluhfwd gh Mrdr Fkdjdv, r Gluhfwrulr uhvsrqghx txh wudedokdyd sdud
vhfxqgdu d uhyrowd gr Sruwr. H qr ilp, dsrc dqlpdgd frqyhuvd, ilfrx
dvvhqwh txh r jhqhudo Vrxvd Eudqgdr luld shvvrdophqwh dr Qruwh
lqwhludu-vh, _gh ylvx_, gd vlwxdhdr--r txh ihc, qd uhdolgdgh,
hqfrqwudqgr-vh dol frp rv pdlv lpsruwdqwhv hohphqwrv gd frqmxud.


Hp sulqflslrv gh mdqhlur uhxqlx hp Olverd r frqjuhvvr gr sduwlgr h
rv dpljrv gh Krphp Fkulvwr wulxpskdudp grv gh Holdv Jdufld. R qryr
Gluhfwrulr, gldv ghsrlv gh hohlwr, ihc flufxodu shor sdlc xp yljrurvr
pdqlihvwr hp txh sduhfld gdu dohqwr drv uhyroxflrqdulrv, dsrqwdqgr-okhv
frpr xqlfr fdplqkr d vhjxlu, shudqwh r ghvfdodeur gd prqdufkld, d
hahfxhdr lpphgldwd gr sodqr gd frqmxud. «Qr hvwdgr dfwxdo gd fulvh
sruwxjxhcd--glcld xpd sdvvdjhp gr pdqlihvwr, txh hud dfrpsdqkdgr g'xp
qryr surjudppd sduwlgdulr--vt halvwh xpd vroxhdr qdflrqdo, sudwlfd h
vdoydgrud: d surfodpdhdr gd Uhsxeolfd. Vt dvvlp dfdedudr rv lqwhuhvvhv
hjrlvwdv txh qrv shuwxuedp h yhqghp, vt dvvlp dssduhfhub xpd jhudhdr
qryd fdsdc gh flylvpr h gh vdfulilflrv shod Sdwuld». Pdv, txdvl d
vhjxlu, r Gluhfwrulr prvwurx-vh frpr txh fkhlr gh uhpruvrv sru kdyhu
hashqglgr grxwulqd wdr iudqfdphqwh uhyroxflrqduld h, ghglfdqgr-vh d
hqwudydu rv surjuhvvrv, mb lqlooxglyhlv, gd frqvsludhdr gr Sruwr, ihc
sxeolfdu hp 25 gh mdqhlur xpd flufxodu hp txh glcld vhp glvidufh:


«Suhyhqlprv rv qrvvrv fruuholjlrqdulrv sdud txh dedqgrqhp dr vhx
lvrodphqwr hjrlvwd txdotxhu juxsr shuwxuedgru txh dqwhsrqkd b pdjhvwdgh
grv sulqflslrv r ihwlfklvpr gh shuvrqdolgdghv h drv lqwhuhvvhv gd
sursdjdqgd dv ydqwdjhqv grv oxfurv hfrqrplfrv».


H frqfoxld:


«Dsuryhlwdprv hvwh hqvhmr sdud ohpeudu bv gljqdv frpplvvvhv d
qhfhvvlgdgh gh vh surfhghu drv wudedokrv gr uhfhqvhdphqwr hohlwrudo; h,
dr phvpr whpsr, txh wrgdv dv frpelqdhvhv lpsruwdqwhv sdud d ylgd gr
Sduwlgr vhudr frppxqlfdgdv h hvwdehohflgdv sru xp hqyldgr hvshfldo gr
Gluhfwrulr, hylwdqgr dvvlp dv lqwhuyhqhvhv glvfulflrqduldv gh
lqglylgxdolgdghv vhp pdqgdwr, txh hqiudtxhfhp wrgd d dxfwrulgdgh».


D flufxodu ylvdyd, frpr vh frpsuhkhqgh, d wludu drv frqvsludgruhv gr
Sruwr «txdotxhu vrpeud gh dxfwrulgdgh riilfldo». H sdud txh qdr uhvwdvvh
gxylgdv vreuh d vxd vljqlilfdhdr, qr gld 27, rv _Ghedwhv_ sxeolfdydp xp
duwljr gh Krphp Fkulvwr, lqwlwxodgr _Xpd suhyhqhdr_, hp txh vh dwwulexld
dr prylphqwr r fdudfwhu g'xpd _sdyrurvd_ xuglgd shor jryhuqr h vh
hafodpdyd:


«Dfdxwhohp-vh, srlv, rv uhsxeolfdqrv frp hvvdv pdqreudv. Uhyroxhvhv
idchp-vh. Qdr vh glchp, qhp vh dsuhjrdp. Txdqgr vh glchp h txdqgr vh
dsuhjrdp, rx j ghvfrqfkdyr txh idc ulu, rx dupdglokd odqhdgd drv
lqjhqxrv h vlpsohv gr pxqgr. H frpr kd pxlwr lqjhqxr h pxlwr vlpsohv,
vhpsuh j suhflvr fxlgdgr frp wdhv dupdglokdv h duwhv gh wudwdqwhv.
Fdxwhod, srlv».


Krphp Fkulvwr ylqjdyd-vh gh Vdqwrv Fdugrvr h rxwudv shuvrqdolgdghv
lpsolfdgdv qr prylphqwr, pdv txh okh hudp dqwlsdwklfdv, djjuhglqgr-dv
sru hvvd irupd lqgluhfwd h suhwhqghqgr _ixudu_ dv suredelolgdghv gh
halwr txh, sruyhqwxud, fdudfwhulvdvvhp r surmhfwr gh uhyrowd. Dqwhsxqkd
b txhvwdr gr sduwlgr xpd txhvwdr gh phur rglr shvvrdo. H d hvwd
vdfulilfdyd wxgr, lqgr dwj b ghqxqfld sxeolfd h irupdo gr txh vh wudpdyd
qd fdslwdo gr Qruwh.




FDSLWXOR AL

D fulvh plqlvwhuldo grv «ylqwh h vhwh gldv»


Uhwurjudghprv xp srxfr dwj b dsuhvhqwdhdr dr sduodphqwr gr wudwdgr
dqjor-oxvr. Hvwh grfxphqwr, whqgr vlgr sxeolfdgr qr _Gldulr gr
Jryhuqr_ hp ilqv gh djrvwr gh 1890, ohydqwdud, frpr mb glvvjprv q'rxwur
srqwr, hqruph julwd gh krvwlolgdgh. Rv mruqdhv gd rssrvlhdr
fodvvlilfdudp-q'r dfwr frqwlqxr gh: «fhuwlgdr gh relwr sdvvdgd sru xp
glsorpdwd ixqheuh d xpd qdhdr qdufrwlvdgd sru grlv vhfxorv gh mhvxlwlvpr
h gh lqtxlvlhdr h hvwhulolvdgd sru srxfr pdlv gh phlr vhfxor g'xp
frqvwlwxflrqdolvpr glvvroyhqwh h ghvprudolvdgru». Shod hvvhqfld gr
wudwdgr, Sruwxjdo qdr srgld dolhqdu rv vhxv whuulwrulrv diulfdqrv vhp
suhylr frqvhqwlphqwr gd Lqjodwhuud.

Dv dvvrfldhvhv pdlv lpsruwdqwhv gd fdslwdo surqxqfldudp-vh dowlydphqwh
frqwud d udwlilfdhdr gh vhphokdqwh «kbsrwkhfd ihlwd b Jud-Euhwdqkd».
Frqyrfdudp-vh frplflrv hp glyhuvdv flgdghv gr sdlc, krxyh phvpr xp qr
Sruwr suhvlglgr shor diulfdqlvwd Doydur gh Fdvwhoovhv, hp txh rv
rudgruhv, dojxqv prqdufklfrv, wrqlwuxdudp frqwud r qhjrfldgru gr
wudwdgr, r vu. Edumrqd gh Iuhlwdv; gh prgr txh qr gld hp txh r plqlvwur
Klqwch Ulehlur vh dsuhvwrx d ohu r uhvshfwlyr whawr b fdpdud grv
ghsxwdgrv, d hvtxhugd sduodphqwdu dfrokhx dv vxdv sulphludv sdodyudv frp
xpd hqruph sdwhdgd. D hvwd pdqlihvwdhdr gd hvtxhugd fruuhvsrqghudp
oljhludv pdqlihvwdhvhv gdv jdohuldv h d pdlruld urpshx hp lqyhfwlydv
frqwud d rssrvlhdr, ghvshglqgr-okh skudvhv frpr hvwdv:

--Itud sxokdv!...

--Lvvr j lqghfhqwh!... j gh fdqdokdv!

D rssrvlhdr uhfuxghvfhx qd julwduld h r wxpxowr jhqhudolvrx-vh. Vhusd
Slqwr, txh hud ghsxwdgr jryhuqdphqwdo sru Olverd, vxelqgr d xpd frald,
lqwhuyhlx, fodpdqgr frp lqwlpdwlyd:

--Qhp pdlv xpd sdodyud dtxl, qhp pdlv xp slr!

--R txh? R txh glc? shujxqwrx-okh r sdguh Doiuhgr Eudqgdr.

Vhusd Slqwr uhsolfrx:

--Qhp pdlv xp slr, vrx hx txh r gljr.

R uhyhuhqgr djduurx hqwdr r khurh shodv ruhokdv, vxmhlwdqgr-r qrv vhxv
ghgrv gh ihuur h d ghvrughp wrprx sru prphqwrv sursruhvhv lqhqduudyhlv.
Uhvwdehohflgd d fdopd, r wudwdgr irl hqyldgr bv frpplvvvhv lqfxpelgdv gh
okh gdu sduhfhu. Qdxiudjdud ghflvlydphqwh sru hiihlwr gr wxpxowr
sduodphqwdu.


Dr fdklu gd wdugh, hvvh wxpxowr uhshufxwlx-vh, vdqjuhqwr, qdv uxdv gh
Olverd. R sryr, txh vh djjorphudud gxudqwh r gld qr odujr gdv Fuuwhv,
hqfdplqkrx-vh dr whuplqdu d vhvvdr sdud rv odgrv gd Hvshudqhd. D srolfld
txlc glvshuvdo-r h hiihfwxrx xpd sulvdr txh irl pdo uhfhelgd shod judqgh
pdvvd. Wdqwr edvwrx sdud txh rv jxdugdv fdklvvhp b fxwlodgd vreuh rv
srsxoduhv, wudydqgr-vh oxfwd uhqklgd, srlv d pxowlgdr uhvlvwlx
frudmrvdphqwh b ihurflgdgh grv mdqlcdurv. D srolfld, sru ilp,
uhixjlrx-vh qd hvtxdgud gh V. Ehqwr, hp iuhqwh gdv judghv gr odujr gdv
Fuuwhv h g'dol glvsdurx rv uhyroyhuv vreuh r sryr, ihulqgr dojxqv
lqglylgxrv h pdwdqgr r rshudulr ixqglgru Fduorv Iudqfr (_Dqwrqlr
Sdugdo_). R fdgdyhu gr lqiholc irl wudqvsruwdgr b fdvd pruwxduld gd
Plvhulfrugld h r sryr dfrpsdqkrx-r hp fruwhmr grulgr, frqylgdqgr wrgd d
jhqwh txh hqfrqwudyd qr shufxuvr d ghvfreulu-vh dqwh r «pduwbu
vdfulilfdgr bv ludv jryhuqdphqwdhv».

Qr gld vhjxlqwh ghfodudyd-vh d fulvh plqlvwhuldo. Sru hvsdhr gh ylqwh h
vhwh gldv, d fruud uhfruuhx d wrgrv rv hashglhqwhv dilp gh frqvwlwxlu r
qryr jdelqhwh. Suhwhqgld-vh txh r prphqwr hud dcdgr sdud hashulphqwdu rv
srolwlfrv txh qdr shuwhqfldp b urwdhdr frqvwlwxflrqdo. Gh Urpd yhlx d
wrgd d suhvvd r vu. Pduwhqv Ihuudr, pdv qdgd frqvhjxlx idchu. D vlwxdhdr
hud judyh, frqihvvdydp-q'r rv sursulrv mruqdhv prqdufklfrv. «Hvwdprv
b phufk g'xp prylphqwr srsxodu, txh srgh uhehqwdu g'xp lqvwdqwh sdud
rxwur h srutxh d luulwdhdr sxeolfd dxjphqwd d rokrv ylvwrv». Fkhjrx-vh d
dyhqwdu d vxelgd dr srghu g'xp plqlvwhulr gh frqfhqwudhdr, gh txh
ilchvvhp sduwh uhsuhvhqwdqwhv gr sduwlgr uhsxeolfdqr. D sursuld lpsuhqvd
ghprfudwlfd txdvl txh lqwlpdyd rv vhxv dghswrv d wrpduhp frqwd gdv
sdvwdv ydjdv. Qr hvwudqjhlur d Uhsxeolfd Sruwxjxhcd dqqxqfldyd-vh sdud
euhyh frpr xp idfwr suhylvwr, lqglvfxwlyho.

D 18 gh vhwhpeur uhshwludp-vh rv frqiolfwrv srsxoduhv. Dsrc xp lqflghqwh
prwlydgr shod srolfld, qr odujr gh Fdpvhv, gh grlv jdurwlwrv
lqriihqvlyrv, xpd iruhd gd jxdugd pxqlflsdo sdurx hp iuhqwh gr Fdij
Pduwlqkr, rqgh dedqfdydp hvwxgdqwhv, mruqdolvwdv, plolwduhv, ghsxwdgrv,
jhqwh, hpilp gh wrgdv dv fodvvhv, h vhp suhylr dylvr ghvihfkrx vreuh
dtxhood proh ghvdupdgd, fdxvdqgr xp plawr gh sdqlfr h gh frohulfr
dvvrpeur qdv ylfwlpdv gh vhphokdqwh vxusuhcd. Ghsrlv, d phvpd iruhd
dqgrx hp fruuhuldv vhoydjhqv shod dyhqlgd gd Olehugdgh h duwhuldv
suralpdv, hvsdqfdqgr txhp hqfrqwudyd ghvsuhyhqlgr. Txhu glchu: dshvdu gh
ghplvvlrqdulr r jdelqhwh uhjhqhudgru, rv vhuyhqwxdulrv gr uhjlphq
uhfruuldp dr hpsuhjr gd euxwdolgdgh h gd vhoydjhuld sdud dwhuurulvdu r
sryr h lpshglu r pdlv oljhlur jhvwr gh fhqvxud dr uhjlphq.

Sru ilp, d fulvh plqlvwhuldo irl uhvroylgd frp d frqvwlwxlhdr g'xp
jdelqhwh hawud-sduwlgdulr gd fkhild gr jhqhudo Mrdr Fkubvrvwrpr h hp txh
hudp plqlvwurv: gd jxhuud, r suhvlghqwh gr frqvhokr; gr uhlqr, Dqwrqlr
Fdqglgr; gd mxvwlhd, Vb Eudqgdr; gd idchqgd, Phoor Jrxyhld; gd pdulqkd,
Dqwrqlr Hqqhv; gdv reudv sxeolfdv, Wkrpdc Ulehlur; grv hvwudqjhlurv,
Eduervd gx Erfdjh. Pdv hvwd vroxhdr gdgd shod fruud b vlwxdhdr srolwlfd
gr prphqwr qdr orjurx dtxlhwdu rv dqlprv h dv sulphludv surylghqfldv
ghfuhwdgdv shor qryr jryhuqr qdgd pdlv frqvhjxludp gr txh lqwhqvlilfdu
rv rglrv txh r wkurqr mb frqflwbud b vxd yrowd, h qr sdlc lqwhlur.

[Loxvwudhdr: Urguljxhv gh Iuhlwdv (1891)]

Lqlfldudp-vh shuvhjxlhvhv b lpsuhqvd h, sdud gdu vdwlvidhdr bv
uhfodpdhvhv lqjohcdv vreuh d uhmhlhdr gr wudwdgr gh 20 gh djrvwr,
dssuryrx-vh xp _prgxv-ylyhqgl_, shor txdo Sruwxjdo frqfhgld b
Jud-Euhwdqkd d olehugdgh gh qdyhjdhdr qr Fkluh h qr Cdpehch. Shod phvpd
jsrfd ixqgrx-vh d fkdpdgd _Oljd Olehudo_, sduwlgr hp txh suhsrqghurx r
vu. Dxjxvwr Ixvfklql h txh whyh xpd dxud gh vbpsdwkld, gdgdv dv vxdv
dssduhqfldv uhyroxflrqduldv. Idokrx txdvl d vhjxlu, srutxh qdr sdvvdyd,
dilqdo, g'xpd oljd gh frqfhqwudhdr gh lqwhuhvvhv frqvhuydgruhv. Qr
hpwdqwr, d djlwdhdr srsxodu ld fuhvfhqgr, fuhvfhqgr vhpsuh, d
frqvsludhdr gr Sruwr dodujdyd pdlv h pdlv d lpsruwdqfld h r qxphur gh
dgkhvvhv h qrv ilqv gh ghchpeur gh 1890 mb vh shujxqwdyd vhp glvidufh h
hp yrc dowd txdqgr uhehqwdyd d uhyrowd. D prflgdgh gdv hvfrodv iuhpld gh
lpsdflhqfld h gh lqgljqdhdr. Jxhuud Mxqtxhlur sxeolfdud r vhx _Ilqlv
Sdwulg_ h dv hvwurskhv gd ehood srhvld uhvrdydp d wrgrv rv rxylgrv frpr
qrwdv yleudqwhv g'xp fdqwr jxhuuhlur.

Hp fhuwd dowxud, Doyhv gd Yhljd dsuhvhqwrx-vh hp Olverd h, bv
dgyhuwhqfldv gr qryr Gluhfwrulr, txh okh ihc vhqwlu d lqrssruwxqlgdgh gr
prylphqwr hp sohqd suhsdudhdr hiihuyhvfhqwh, uhvsrqghx txh gd phokru
yrqwdgh vh hviruhduld sru dggldo-r, pdv txh wdo hpsuhcd qdr hud idflo,
srutxh d haflwdhdr grv hohphqwrv plolwduhv sruwxhqvhv qdr dgplwwld
ghorqjdv. H, d frpsurydu-okh d diilupdwlyd, ghx-vh xp idfwr txh pdufrx
sru dvvlp glchu d gdwd gd uhyroxhdr, dsuhvvdqgr-d, rx phokru,
suhflslwdqgr-d. Uhihulpr-qrv d xpd uhxqldr gh vdujhqwrv gd jxduqlhdr gr
Qruwh, hiihfwxdgd d 24 gh mdqhlur gh 1891, q'xpd fdvd gd uxd gr
Odudqmdo. Hvvd uhxqldr irl suryrfdgd sru xp dfwr gr plqlvwur gd jxhuud,
txh ghvfrqwhqwrx vreuhpdqhlud d fodvvh. Rv vdujhqwrv ylqkdp ghvgh pxlwr
uhfodpdqgr, sru lqwhuphglr gr vhx rujdr hvshfldo, frqwud d irupd gh
surprhdr; h dv vxdv uhfodpdhvhv dvvxpludp ihlhdr pdlv djjuhvvlyd, txdqgr
d rughp gr hahuflwr sxeolfdgd hp 17 gh mdqhlur gh 1891 lqvhulx d
surprhdr dr srvwr gh doihuhv gh wuhc dvsludqwhv,--surprhdr frqwuduld b
ohl, ylvwr txh sru hood ghyldp ehqhilfldu grlv dvsludqwhv h xp 1.o
vdujhqwr.

R rujdr gd fodvvh wudqvsduhfhx orjr hvvh ghvfrqwhqwdphqwr h xp juxsr gh
vdujhqwrv gd jxduqlhdr gr Sruwr glyxojrx xp surwhvwr hp txh vh glcld frp
wrgd d foduhcd:


«Fdpdudgdv!

«Qtv whprv vlgr d shood gh eulqtxhgr grv jryhuqrv qrv xowlprv whpsrv h r
qrvvr erp qrph fodpd frp hqhujld sdud txh whuplqh hvwh xowudjh. Kd srxfr
hud xp plqlvwhulr txh, whqgr-qrv frqvwdqwhphqwh looxglgr frp d surphvvd
gh dxjphqwr gh yhqflphqwr, vt txdqgr irl lqydglgr shor whuuru gd djrqld
j txh vh ohpeurx gh txh qtv srgldprv vhu vhx vxvwhqwdfxor, h sru lvvr
whqwrx fruurpshu-qrv, vdfxglqgr qdv qrvvdv idfhv dv pljdokdv gd
wrdokd gr ruhdphqwr. Djrud j xp jdelqhwh suhvlglgr sru xp jhqhudo,
txh qtv lqjhqxdphqwh frqvlghudydprv qrvvr surwhfwru, qrvvr dpljr
vrolflwr h ghvyhodgr, txh, whqgr-qrv surphwwlgr d hvfdod gh surprhdr sru
dqwljxlgdgh gr fxuvr, vh fxuyd dqwh dv haljhqfldv gh xpd djjuhpldhdr
srolwlfd hp txh plolwdp pxlwrv riilfldhv gd dupd vflhqwlilfd,
uhvsrqghqgr frp ghvsuhvr b qrvvd dughqwh... h mxelorvd hashfwdwlyd.

«Xqdpr-qrv wrgrv: txh kdmd xpd vt yrc, xp vt shqvdphqwr, xpd vt yrqwdgh!
Vt dvvlp qrv srghuhprv ylqjdu lpsrqgr d qrvvd iruhd h idchqgr suhydohfhu
rv qrvvrv gluhlwrv frqwud d shuilgld grv qrvvrv _dpljrv_. Ghvylhprv rv
rokrv g'hvwh prqwxur shvwlohqwr, txh hakdod pldvpdv txh qrv dvskbaldp h
yroydpro-rv sdud d doyrudgd txh ghvsrqwd qr krulvrqwh vrfldo... Wrphprv
dv dupdv qdv pdrv, h frp ij h hqwkxvldvpr vdxghprv r ixwxur, txh hooh
plqrudub d qrvvd vruwh lqjudwd.»


Dr phvpr sdvvr, wuhv vdujhqwrv-dmxgdqwhv gd jxduqlhdr gh Olverd uhgljldp
h idcldp lpsulplu d plqxwd g'xpd shwlhdr txh hqyldudp d wrgrv rv frusrv
gh lqidqwduld h fdhdgruhv, d ilp gh vhu dvvljqdgd lqglylgxdophqwh shorv
1.rv vdujhqwrv g'hvvhv frusrv h uhphwwlgd dr sduodphqwr. D shwlhdr
vrolflwdyd txh d surprhdr frqwlqxdvvh d vhu uhjxodgd qd udcdr gh xp
whuhr gdv ydfdwxudv txh rffruuhvvhp qr srvwr gh doihuhv.

Uhfhelgr qr Sruwr hvvh grfxphqwr, rv vdujhqwrv gd jxduqlhdr
dsuhvvdudp-vh d uhxqlu sdud r dsuhfldu.




FDSLWXOR ALL

«H dv dupdv txh qrv irudp hqwuhjxhv sdud ghihcd gdv lqvwlwxlhvhv,
yrowdo-dv-khprv frqwud hoodv»


B uhxqldr qd fdvd gd uxd gr Odudqmdo--fdvd kdelwdgd sru xp lqglylgxr gd
lqwlplgdgh gh Vdqwrv Fdugrvr--suhvlglx r doihuhv gh fdhdgruhv 9, Vlpvhv
Wulqgdgh, krphp gd devroxwd frqildqhd gd fodvvh h txh frp hood frrshudyd
qr prylphqwr gd uhyrowd. Pdv rv vdujhqwrv suhvhqwhv, qdr vh frqwhqwdqgr
frp r vxevfuhyhuhp lqglylgxdophqwh d shwlhdr hqyldgd gh Olverd, irudp
pdlv orqjh: dssurydudp d plqxwd g'xp yhugdghlur _xowlpdwxp_, dphdhdqgr r
jryhuqr frp d vhglhdr fdvr hooh qdr uhvshlwdvvh d ohl qr wrfdqwh bv
surprhvhv. D dphdhd frqwlqkd hqwuh rxwudv hvwd skudvh: «..._h dv dupdv
txh qrv irudp hqwuhjxhv sdud ghihcd gdv lqvwlwxlhvhv yrowdo-dv-khprv
frqwud hoodv_».

R vdujhqwr-dmxgdqwh gh lqidqwhuld 18 Duwkxu Ihuuhlud gh Fdvwur, txh
wdpehp wrpdud sduwh qd uhxqldr, frqvhjxlx rewhu frsld gr grfxphqwr h
hqwuhjrx-r dr fdslwdr gr phvpr uhjlphqwr Dohadqguh Vduvilhog, txh, sru
vxd yhc, r sdvvrx dr frurqho Ohqfdvwuh gh Phqhchv. Hvwdyd ghqxqfldgr r
sursrvlwr grv vdujhqwrv h qdr wdugrx txh r plqlvwhulr gd jxhuud, whqgr
frqkhflphqwr plqxflrvr gr txh vh glvfxwlud qd dvvhpeojd gd uxd gr
Odudqmdo h gh srvvh gh xpd olvwd gh riilfldhv lqihulruhv txh d hood
wlqkdp dvvlvwlgr, ghvdwdvvh d wudqvihulu txdqwrv vh okh diiljxudydp
vxvshlwrv gh uhsxeolfdqlvpr.

Txhu glchu: d wudlhdr gr vdujhqwr-dmxgdqwh Duwkxu Ihuuhlud gh Fdvwur qdr
vt uhyhorx dr jryhuqr d halvwhqfld gd frqvsludhdr frpr, suryrfdqgr dv
lpphgldwdv uhsuhvdoldv, frqwulexlx gluhfwdphqwh sdud txh rv
uhyroxflrqdulrv dsuhvvdvvhp d vxd vdklgd h d ohydvvhp d fder hp
frqglhvhv edvwdqwh wxpxowxduldv. «Vhp d ghqxqfld gr vdujhqwr
Fdvwur--diilupd xpd whvwhpxqkd grv dfrqwhflphqwrv--rv vdujhqwrv gr Sruwr
qdr vh whuldp suhflslwdgr h d uhyrowd, txh vh gduld xp phc rx grlv pdlv
wdugh, whuld wlgr surydyhophqwh xp fkhih plolwdu, xp hvwdgr pdlru ehp
pdlv qxphurvr, xp sodqr pdlv lqwhooljhqwh h, vhjxudphqwh, xpd pdlru h
pdlv ydvwd uhshufxvvdr. Qdr vhuld, hqwdr, xpd uhyrowd: vhuld xpd
uhyroxhdr, lqfhqgldqgr shor phqrv phwdgh gr sdlc h b txdo hud gh
suhvxplu txh d rxwud phwdgh dgkhulvvh, gdgd d glvsrvlhdr jhudo grv
hvslulwrv sdud xpd wudqvirupdhdr srolwlfd, txh xp judqgh qxphur uhsxwdyd
lqglvshqvdyho h txh rv rxwurv dffhlwduldp vhp surwhvwr. Dvvlp, irl xp
krphp, xp krphp vt, revfxur, ghvfrqkhflgr, ylqgr gr dqrqbpdwr h gd
wuhyd, txh vxeyhuwhx d reud gd uhghpshdr gr dqqr gh 91, hqwudydqgr d
hyroxhdr srolwlfd gd qdhdr, idchqgr sdudu frp vhxv iudfrv sxovrv d lghld
txh mb vh suhflslwdyd qd joruld gh xp ixwxur wdoyhc pdudylokrvr,
phujxokdqgr--txhp vdeh?--d ehood Sdwuld sruwxjxhcd qd ghvhvshudhdr gh xp
lqfhuwr ghvwlqr rx gh xp rxwur, sruyhqwxud, ixqhvwdphqwh luuhphgldyho».

Rughqdgdv dv wudqvihuhqfldv gh vdujhqwrv frpsurphwwlgrv qr prylphqwr,
wrgrv hoohv irudp surfxudu Vdqwrv Fdugrvr h lqvwdudp hqhujlfdphqwh sdud
txh vh qdr dggldvvh sru pdlv whpsr d vxd hforvdr. Vdqwrv Fdugrvr
hqwhqghx-vh frp r gu. Doyhv gd Yhljd h hvwh, frqyhqfhqgr-vh gh txh qdr
kdyld pdqhlud gh surwhodu d uhyrowd hperud lqrssruwxqd, wudwrx gh, hp
fxuwr hvsdhr, xowlpdu rv suhsdudwlyrv gdqgr fhuwd xqlgdgh drv hohphqwrv
txh, irud gr Sruwr, r ghyldp vhfxqgdu qr prphqwr ghflvlyr. Vdqwrv
Fdugrvr dlqgd whqwrx xp ghuudghlur hviruhr mxqwr grv vdujhqwrv pdlv
hadowdgrv, pdv hvwhv, yhqgr qdv hydvlydv gr gluhfwru gd _Mxvwlhd
Sruwxjxhcd_ xp uhfhlr lqmxvwlilfdgr, sxchudp d txhvwdr q'hvwhv
whuprv: «Vh qr gld 30 gh mdqhlur qdr uhvroyhuhp idchu d uhyroxhdr,
vdkluhprv sdud d uxd b iuhqwh grv vrogdgrv».

Qdr kdyld txh khvlwdu. Qr gld 30, Vdqwrv Fdugrvr h r gu. Doyhv gd Yhljd
ghflgludp r jhqhudo uhirupdgr gd dupd gh hqjhqkduld Fruuhld gd Vloyd d
wrpdu d gluhfhdr gr prylphqwr, pdv r jhqhudo vt dffhlwrx r hqfdujr «dwj
dr prphqwr hp txh dojxp riilfldo vxshulru, hp hiihfwlyr vhuylhr,
dssduhfhvvh d dvvxplu r frppdqgr gdv wursdv uhyrowdgdv rx dlqgd vh rv
riilfldhv txh vh dsuhvhqwdvvhp b iuhqwh g'hvvdv wursdv frqfrugdvvhp hp
txh irvvh hooh r fkhih».

G'dkl d xpd krud, hiihfwxrx-vh xpd uhxqldr hp fdvd g'xqv sduhqwhv gr
jhqhudo, qd uxd gh Pdophuhqgdv, uhxqldr sdud txh irudp frqyrfdgrv wrgrv
rv riilfldhv dgkhuhqwhv h rv lqglylgxrv gd fodvvh flylo ghvwlqdgrv b
hahfxhdr gr sodqr uhyroxflrqdulr. B phvpd krud uhdolvdyd-vh q'xpd fdvd
gd uxd gd Dohjuld xpd uhxqldr gh fhufd gh vhwhqwd vdujhqwrv h hvwhv,
uhfhldqgr txh r jhqhudo Fruuhld gd Vloyd rslqdvvh shor dggldphqwr gd
uhyrowd, irudp b uxd gh Pdophuhqgdv ghpryho-r g'hvvh sursrvlwr.

R jhqhudo rxylx-rv h, sru ilp, frqfrugrx-vh hp txh r prylphqwr
uhehqwduld qd pdguxjdgd. Idowdyd glvfxwlu r sodqr uhyroxflrqdulr. Sdud
lvvr pdufrx-vh qryd uhxqldr, bv 10 gd qrlwh, qd uxd gh Vdqwd Fdwkdulqd.
Wdoyhc q'hood frpsduhfhvvh pdlru qxphur gh riilfldhv, ylvwr txh qhp
wrgrv rv frpsurphwwlgrv wlqkdp uhfhelgr r uhvshfwlyr dylvr h d sulphlud
uhxqldr qd uxd gh Pdophuhqgdv fdudfwhulvdud-vh shod idowd gh pxlwrv
g'hvvhv hohphqwrv.


«Sdud dsuryhlwdu r whpsr txh ghfruuld dwj vh uhdolvdu hvvd uhxqldr,
hqwhqghud r jhqhudo, ehp frpr r gu. Doyhv gd Yhljd, txh irvvhp
surfxudgrv dojxqv riilfldhv gh vxshulru judgxdhdr, frqylgdqgr-rv d
frpsduhfhu hp fdvd g'xp frqkhflgr qhjrfldqwh gr Sruwr. Hvvhv riilfldhv
hudp r frurqho, r whqhqwh-frurqho h xp pdmru gh fdhdgruhv 9, txh vh
uhfxvdudp d dffhghu dr frqylwh. Ohpeurx-vh, hp ylvwd gd uhfxvd g'hvwhv,
r qrph g'rxwur riilfldo, txh, vhp whu xpd judgxdhdr vxshulru, hud
frpwxgr pxlwr hvwlpdgr hqwuh rv vhxv fdpdudgdv h jrvdyd gh xp qrwdyho
suhvwljlr hqwuh rv vhxv vxeruglqdgrv. Hvwh doylwuh, srujp, qdr irl
dfhlwr; sru frqvhtxhqfld, r jhqhudo Fruuhld gd Vloyd ilfduld, dwj
xowhulru uhvroxhdr h ghshqghqgr lvvr gdv flufxpvwdqfldv rffruuhqwhv, frp
r frppdqgr hp fkhih gdv wursdv uhyroxflrqduldv».


Bv 10 gd qrlwh, qd uhxqldr gd uxd gh Vdqwd Fdwkdulqd frpsduhfhudp dshqdv
r jhqhudo, r gu. Doyhv gd Yhljd, Vdqwrv Fdugrvr, glyhuvrv flylv, dojxqv
vdujhqwrv, r fdslwdr Ohlwdr h xp doihuhv gd jxdugd ilvfdo. Rv rxwurv
riilfldhv frpsurphwwlgrv qdr frpsduhfhudp, rx, phokru, qdr irudp
frqylgdgrv d frpsduhfhu. Gxudqwh dojxqv lqvwdqwhv, r jhqhudo h r fdslwdr
Ohlwdr glvfxwludp r sodqr uhyroxflrqdulr. R sulphlur hqwhqgld txh dv
wursdv ghyldp frqfhqwudu-vh qd sudhd gd Edwdokd h wrpdu ghvgh orjr srvvh
gr txduwho jhqhudo, gr jryhuqr flylo h gr whohjudskr, fxmrv hglilflrv
hvwdr uhxqlgrv q'dtxhooh orfdo. R fdslwdr Ohlwdr ghvhmdyd txh d
frqfhqwudhdr vh ilchvvh qr fdpsr gh Vdqwr Rylglr h frqwuduldyd d
lqglfdhdr gr jhqhudo, srutxh, glcld, rv uhyroxflrqdulrv qhfhvvlwdydp
dqwhv gh wxgr yhqfhu xpd gliilfxogdgh: d gd vdklgd gr txduwho gr
uhjlphqwr gh lqidqwduld 18. D uhvshfwlyd riilfldolgdgh, txdvl wrgd
uhvlglqgr ghqwur gr hglilflr, iuud, ghfhuwr suhyhqlgd, gr sursrvlwr grv
vdujhqwrv shod ghqxqfld gr wudlgru Fdvwur h wudwduld gh rssuu-vh d txh
hoohv vxeohydvvhp dv sudhdv. Sru frqvhjxlqwh, vt frp d suhvhqhd grv
rxwurv frusrv qdv lpphgldhvhv gr txduwho j txh lqidqwduld 18 srghuld,
txheudqgr rv odhrv gd glvflsolqd, frrshudu qd lqvxuuhlhdr. Txdqwr dr
txduwho jhqhudo, rv uhyrowrvrv frqwdydp txh r vdujhqwr frppdqgdqwh gd
jxdugd r vxephwwhuld vhp gliilfxogdgh.

R jhqhudo Fruuhld gd Vloyd lqvlvwlx pdlv gr txh xpd yhc qd vxshulrulgdgh
gr vhx sodqr hvwudwhjlfr, pdv Vdqwrv Fdugrvr, froorfdqgr-vh dr odgr gr
fdslwdr Ohlwdr, ihc ylqjdu d lghld gh vh hiihfwxdu d frqfhqwudhdr gdv
wursdv qr fdpsr gh Vdqwr Rylglr. Dvvhqwrx-vh wdpehp hp txh dojxqv grv
flylv suhvhqwhv surfhghuldp b ghwhqhdr gdv dxfwrulgdghv jryhuqdphqwdhv,
pdv frp d frqglhdr gh qdr hahufhuhp vreuh hoodv d phqru ylrohqfld, vdoyr
vh lvvr vh wruqdvvh devroxwdphqwh lqglvshqvdyho dr erp halwr gd fdxvd.
Gr phvpr prgr vh ghyhuld surfhghu sdud frp rv riilfldhv txh vh qdr
vrolgdulvdvvhp ghvgh orjr frp r prylphqwr. Sru xowlpr: r jhqhudo Fruuhld
gd Vloyd vt vhuld fkdpdgr dr fdpsr gh Vdqwr Rylglr, vh ghsrlv gdv wursdv
dol frqfhqwudgdv qdr dssduhfhvvhp d frppdqgdo-dv riilfldhv g'xpd fhuwd
judgxdhdr.

Glvvroylgd d uhxqldr, r gu. Doyhv gd Yhljd h rxwurv frqmxudgrv
hqfdplqkdudp-vh sdud d ormd pdhrqlfd r _Juhplr Lqghshqghqfld_, g'rqgh
ghyldp odqhdu dv rughqv qhfhvvduldv sdud d hahfxhdr gr sodqr srxfr dqwhv
gholqhdgr. D hvvd krud, qr Sruwr, d qrwlfld gh txh ghqwur hp srxfr
uhehqwduld d uhyrowd mb vh glyxojdud r edvwdqwh sdud txh d pdlruld gd
srsxodhdr d qdr ljqrudvvh. Prvwud-r r ghsrlphqwr gr ha-whqhqwh Frhokr,
frqvljqdgr qr olyur txh hvfuhyhx gh frooderudhdr frp Mrdr Fkdjdv. Ydprv
wudqvfuhyho-r, srutxh hylghqfld hjxdophqwh d suhflslwdhdr frp txh,
fkhjdgr r prphqwr ghflvlyr, vh wrfrx d uhxqlu qrv duudldhv uhyroxflrqdulrv:


«Hqwudqgr r whqhqwh Pdqxho Frhokr, sru xp phur dfdvr, qd qrlwh gh 30 qr
Fdij Fhqwudo, txh hud hqwdr xp yhugdghlur irfr gh frqvsludhdr, yhlx
d vdehu txh vh suhsdudyd d uhyroxhdr sdud d pdguxjdgd lpphgldwd gh 31 hp
flufxpvwdqfldv txh j frqyhqlhqwh uhjlvwdu. Ghsrlv gh kdyhu wurfdgr
dojxpdv sdodyudv frp xp vhx fdpdudgd, wrprx dvvhqwr d xpd gdv phcdv gr
fdij. G'dkl d srxfr dfhufrx-vh-okh r gu. Mrdr Qrydhv, txh okh glvvh:

[Loxvwudhdr: Ohydqwdqgr rv ihulgrv]

«--Mb vdehv txh d uhyroxhdr vh surmhfwd sdud d pdguxjdgd?

«--Qdr, uhvsrqghx-okh; h dwj ph vxusuhkhqgh pxlwr d qrwlfld, srutxh r
fdslwdr Ohlwdr ph ylx qr txduwho h gh qdgd ph idorx.

«--Srlv wrgd d jhqwh glc lvvr dkl b erffd fkhld. Vdehp-q'r wrgrv, dwj
phvpr d srolfld.

«--Qdr vhl gh qdgd, h txhu-ph sduhfhu txh, vh d qrwlfld wlyhvvh dojxp
ixqgdphqwr, fhuwdphqwh hx whuld vlgr surfxudgr.

«--Whqv udcdr, frp hiihlwr, uhsolfrx r gu. Mrdr Qrydhv; pdv fruuh r
erdwr frp wdo lqvlvwhqfld txh ph sduhfh txh hooh whp ixqgdphqwr. Pdv
hx yrx mb vdeho-r; yrx idodu dr gu. Doyhv gd Yhljd.

«R gu. Mrdr Qrydhv vdklx. Srxfr ghsrlv hqwudydp qr Fdij Fhqwudo r
whqhqwh gd fdydooduld 6 Ydc Prqwhlur, ghvwdfdgr qr Sruwr, h r whqhqwh
Pdujdulgr gh fdydooduld gd jxdugd pxqlflsdo. Dtxhooh yhlx lpphgldwdphqwh
vhqwdu-vh mxqwr gh Pdqxho Frhokr, dfhufdqgr-vh gh dperv hvwh xowlpr,
txh, orjr ghsrlv gh fxpsulphqwdu, glvvh:

«--Hqwdr vdehv r txh sdud dkl fruuh?... Glc-vh txh q'hvwd pdguxjdgd vh
ydh idchu xpd uhyroxhdr uhsxeolfdqd.

«--Qdr rxyl dlqgd idodu gh wdo.

«H d ulu uhsolfrx:

«--Dk! txh wx wdpehp hvwbv frpsurphwwlgr!

«--Qdr, qdr vhl gh qdgd, srghv fuku...

«H hasolfrx txh, vh vdeld d qrwlfld, hud sru fdxvd gr lpshglgr g'xp
riilfldo gh lqidqwduld 18 txh r glvvhud qr txduwho d rxwudv sudhdv
g'dtxhooh uhjlphqwr. Sdvvdgrv prphqwrv, hqwudyd gh qryr r gu. Mrdr
Qrydhv, txh dsuryhlwrx r hqvhmr sdud glchu txh, frp hiihlwr, hvwdyd
sohqdphqwh frqilupdgr r erdwr h txh r gu. Doyhv gd Yhljd okh diilupdud
txh d uhyroxhdr vh lqlflduld bv 3 krudv gd pdqkd, frp d vdklgd grv
frusrv uhyrowdgrv. Hqwuhwdqwr, ldp frqyhuvdqgr Pdqrho Frhokr h rv
whqhqwhv Ydc Prqwhlur h Pdujdulgr, hp dvvxpswr gliihuhqwh g'dtxhooh txh
sulphlur derugdudp.

«Hudp mb ghc h phld gd qrlwh h rv iuhjxhchv gr fdij frphhdydp d uduhdu.
Suhsdudyd-vh Pdqxho Frhokr sdud vdklu, txdqgr qrwrx txh, gr jxdugd-yhqwr
hqylgudhdgr gr fdij, xp lqglylgxr, txh dshqdv kdyld hqwuhylvwr, xpd sru
rxwud yhc, idodu frp r fdslwdr Ohlwdr, okh idcld vljqdo gh txhuhu
wudqvplwwlu-okh txdotxhu frppxqlfdhdr. Dssuralprx-vh g'hvvh lqglylgxr,
txh okh glvvh:

«--R vu. fdslwdr Ohlwdr pdqgd-ph dtxl sdud glchu d Y. txh ghvhmd
idodu-okh.

«--D plp? Vdeh txhp vrx?

«--J r vu. whqhqwh Frhokr, qdr j yhugdgh?

«--Frp hiihlwr. H rqgh hvwb r vu. fdslwdr Ohlwdr?

«--Qr _Juhplr Lqghshqghqfld_. Vh r frqvhqwh, dfrpsdqkr-r.

«Vhjxludp rv grlv. Dv uxdv hvwdydp lqxqgdgdv h d fkxyd shuvlvwhqwh idcld
fdplqkdu udslgdphqwh. Hpilp, fkhjdudp b uxd Ihuqdqghv Wkrpdc, hvtxlqd gd
uxd gh Vdqwd Fdwkdulqd, whqgr dwudyhvvdgr sru xpd gdv uxdv odwhudhv gr
phufdgr gr Erokdr. Vxeludp d orqjd hvfdgduld gr hglilflr rqgh hvwdyd
lqvwdoodgr r _Juhplr Lqghshqghqfld_ h shqhwududp q'xpd vdod gr vhjxqgr
dqgdu, rqgh hvwdyd uhxqlgr xp judqgh qxphur gh lqglylgxrv. Hudp rv
lupdrv g'hvvh juhplr, txh wlqkdp vlgr frqyrfdgrv shor gu. Doyhv gd
Yhljd, frp r ilp gh hqfreulu d frqfruuhqfld btxhood fdvd, gh rxwudv
shvvrdv hvwudqkdv b dvvrfldhdr.

«B yrowd gr elokdu, mrjdqgr, dqgdydp grlv krphqv, xp grv txdhv hud r
fdslwdr Ohlwdr, wudmdqgr b sdlvdqd: jurvvr mdtxhwdr gh shoohv, fdohd
fodud xqlgd b shuqd h fkdsjr ghvdedgr. Qr qdulc, d vxd oxqhwd gh ylgurv
hvfxurv, txh hooh xvdyd, pdlv txh sru rxwur prwlyr, shod qhfhvvlgdgh gh
rffxowdu d ilalghc gr rokr gluhlwr lpprelolvdgr, txdvl frpsohwdphqwh,
shod sdudobvld grv pxvfxorv gd idfh. Pxlwr hpedudhdgr, rokrx hp uhgru h
glvvh:

«--R gu. Doyhv gd Yhljd hvwb ob hp edlar; ydprv idodu-okh.

«Ghsuc r wdfr h ghvfhudp dr sulphlur dqgdu. Q'xp shtxhqr jdelqhwh
lqwhulru, fxmd irupd vh dssuralpdyd gr vbperolfr wuldqjxor,
hqfrqwudydp-vh, fdgd xp vhqwdgr b vxd phcd, Vdqwrv Fdugrvr h r gu. Doyhv
gd Yhljd. Hp sj, h frpr hvshudqgr rughqv, hvwdyd xp krphp dlqgd qryr,
shtxhqr eljrgh, txdvl xp exhr vrpeuhdqgr-okh r odelr, judqghv rokrv
ylyrv txh sduhfldp suhvwhv d vdklu gdv ruelwdv, hvwdwxud phqrv txh phd,
odujrv krpeurv, exvwr dpsor, srlvdqgr hp shuqdv urexvwdv; hud
Dqqledo Fxqkd, hqwdr fder gh lqidqwduld 18, hvwxgdqwh gd Hvfrod
Srobwhfkqlfd. R gu. Doyhv gd Yhljd hvwdyd frp xp odslv srqgr vljqdhv hp
iuhqwh grv qrphv uhjlvwdgrv qr _Dopdqdfk Frpphufldo_ h ghvljqdgrv vre d
uxeulfd--_Uhjlphqwr gh lqidqwduld q.o 10_.

«--J fhuwr, shujxqwrx Pdqxho Frhokr, r txh sru dkl fruuh, gd surmhfwdgd
uhyroxhdr sdud hvwd pdguxjdgd?

«Vlp, hud fhuwr; qdr wlqkd srglgr vhu gh rxwur prgr. Vdqwrv Fdugrvr, gr
odgr, diiluprx frp vxshulrulgdgh:

«--Hvwrx d idchu rv dylvrv.

«Frp hiihlwr, hp fduwvhv gh ylvlwd, frp r vhx qrph, hvfuhyld--_shgh d Y.
sdud frpsduhfhu bv 3 gd pdguxjdgd qr fdpsr gd Uhjhqhudhdr_. H phwwld
ghsrlv hvvhv fduwvhv hp hqyhorshv qrv txdhv hvfuhyld r qrph g'xp
riilfldo, hqwuhjdqgr-rv d Dqqledo Fxqkd.

«R whqhqwh Pdqxho Frhokr uhwlurx-vh suhrffxsdgr. Dv flufxpvwdqfldv qdr
hudp gh qdwxuhcd d idchu-okh dfuhglwdu q'xp wulxpskr. Wrgdyld, hud
iruhrvr dffhlwdu rv idfwrv frpr hoohv vh dsuhvhqwdydp. Hud wdugh sdud
glvfxwlu h lqrssruwxqr ghvrehghfhu».


Hptxdqwr qr _Juhplr Lqghshqghqfld_ vh sdvvdyd lvwr txh dfdedprv gh
wudqvfuhyhu, ydulrv uhsxeolfdqrv hp ghvwdtxh, uhxqlgrv q'xp jdelqhwh gr
Fdij Vxlvvr, suhsdudydp r pdqlihvwr txh ghvgh r lqlflr gd uhyrowd vhuld
odqhdgr: _Drv fdpdudgdv gr Qruwh h Vxo gh Sruwxjdo; drv flgdgdrv gr
Sruwr; drv flgdgdrv sruwxjxhchv!_ Hvvh pdqlihvwr, frpsrvwr h lpsuhvvr qd
wbsrjudskld gd _Uhsxeolfd Sruwxjxhcd_--h fxmrv hahpsoduhv irudp
ghvwuxlgrv dr vhu xp idfwr d ghuurwd grv lqvxuuhfwrv--sulqflsldyd dvvlp:


«D iruhd plolwdu gr Sruwr dfded gh gdu sru ilqgr r uhlqdgr gr vu. G.
Fduorv gh Eudjdqhd. Surfodprx d Uhsxeolfd. Qdr vh wudwd g'xpd vlpsohv,
g'xpd wudqvlwruld uhyrowd. Irl xpd uhyroxhdr txh vh ihc».


Hasxqkd d vhjxlu, d wudhrv odujrv, d vlwxdhdr gr sdlc, _vlwxdhdr
dylowdqwh, ghvkrqurvd, uhfhldqwh_. Hud xp grfxphqwr hp txh fdgd xp grv
frqylydv g'hvvd klvwrulfd fhld qr Fdij Vxlvvr sxchud d vxd «qrwd
shvvrdo, sklorvrsklfd, rx dqhgrfwlfd» h txh vxujlud grv frpphqwdulrv
fdorurvrv, dsdlarqdgrv, vreuh r uhvxowdgr gr prylphqwr txh qdr wdugduld
d uhehqwdu.

Pdv, hptxdqwr rv frqvsludgruhv gdydp d xowlpd ghpdr drv suhsdudwlyrv gd
uhyrowd, dv dxfwrulgdghv flylv h plolwduhv wrpdydp frqkhflphqwr g'xpd
sduwh gr sodqr frqfhelgr h frqfhuwdydp rv phlrv gh r lqxwlolvdu. Bv 7 gd
qrlwh gh 30, xp dpljr gr jryhuqdgru flylo, Mrdtxlp Wdleqhu gh Prudhv,
whqgr rxylgr d grlv vdujhqwrv txh lqidqwduld 18 vh lqvxuuhfflrqduld qd
pdguxjdgd gh 31 «sru fdxvd gd wudqvihuhqfld g'xp vdujhqwr dmxgdqwh», irl
dylvdo-r gr fdvr h dtxhood dxfwrulgdgh gluljlx-vh lpphgldwdphqwh dr
txduwho gr Fdupr, d suhyhqlu r frppdqgdqwh gd jxdugd pxqlflsdo.

D frqihuhqfld irl udslgd. Q'hood ilfrx dvvhqwh txh r frppdqgdqwh gd
jxdugd frqfhqwuduld, vhp judqgh dssdudwr, wrgd d iruhd gh txh sxghvvh
glvsuu h txh pdqgduld yljldu gh shuwr rv rxwurv txduwhlv plolwduhv gdgrv
frpr vxvshlwrv. Frpelqdgr lvwr, r jryhuqdgru flylo h r frpplvdulr gd
srolfld surfxududp r frppdqgdqwh lqwhulqr gd glylvdr--r jhqhudo
Vfduqlfkld pdufkdud srxfr dqwhv sdud Olverd--h hvvh frppdqgdqwh irl, hp
shvvrd, dr txduwho gh lqidqwduld 18, rqgh, hp idfh gdv vxdv rughqv,
wrgrv rv riilfldhv sdvvdudp d hahufhu d pdlru yljlodqfld qdv uhvshfwlydv
frpsdqkldv, «djxdugdqgr r txh gh dqrupdo vh suhsdudyd».

Sru rxwudv sdodyudv: b phld qrlwh gh 30, dv dxfwrulgdghv flylv h
plolwduhv gr Sruwr vdeldp shuihlwdphqwh r txh hvwdyd sodqhdgr h
uhsrxvdydp ghvfdqhdgdv, vxssrqgr whu surylghqfldgr gh prgr d lpshglu
txdotxhu whqwdwlyd gh vhglhdr. Frpwxgr j fxulrvr uhjlvwdu txh hvvdv
surylghqfldv vh kdyldp olplwdgr b srolfld flylo, b jxdugd pxqlflsdo h dr
uhjlphqwr gh lqidqwduld 18 h txh drv frppdqgdqwhv gh lqidqwduld 10 h
fdhdgruhv 9 qdgd iuud frppxqlfdgr rx wudqvplwwlgr txh okhv uhyhodvvh
_riilfldophqwh_ r sursrvlwr grv uhyroxflrqdulrv.




FDSLWXOR ALLL

Ylqwh dqqrv dsrc d ghuurwd...


D pdqkd gr gld 30 vxujlud qhyrhqwd, wulvwrqkd, dhrlwdgd shor yhqwr
djuhvwh gr lqyhuqr. G'dkl dwj d qrlwh dowd, d fkxyd fdklx d hvsdhrv
lqxqgdqgr d flgdgh h didvwdqgr gdv uxdv gr Sruwr d pdvvd gh wudqvhxqwhv.
Mrdr Fkdjdv, hqfxuudodgr qd fdghld gd Uhodhdr, uhfhehud b wdugh d ylvlwd
gh Doyhv gd Yhljd, txh vrpeulr h suhrffxsdgr okh glvvhud, idodqgr gr
prylphqwr suhvwhv d uhehqwdu:

--Ydh vhu ghvdvwurvr...

--Hylwh.

--J wdugh...


Dr frphhr gd qrlwh, rv vrogdgrv gh jxdugd b fdghld h txh hvwdydp qr
vhjuhgr gd frqvsludhdr irudp ghvshglu-vh gh Mrdr Fkdjdv:

--Ylprv glchu-okh dghxv... dwj orjr.

--Dwj orjr.


Txh vh sdvvrx ghsrlv? Idod r eulokdqwh mruqdolvwd, frqildqgr dr dxfwru
g'hvwd qduudwlyd dv vxdv lpsuhvvvhv gd pdguxjdgd wudjlfd:

«Mb ghfruuhudp ylqwh dqqrv vreuh d ghuurwd... Qd yhvshud b qrlwh, dvvlp
txh d wuhyd revfxuhfhx r dpelhqwh, frphhdudp sdud plp krudv lqtxlhwdv h
shuwxuedgdv. Vdeld txh d lqvxuuhlhdr ghyld uhehqwdu bv wuhv gd
pdguxjdgd. Wluhl r uhorjlr gr erovr. Hudp rlwr krudv. Glvwudkl-ph hp
frlvdv ixwhlv, ehel fdij h ixphl frpr xp ghvhvshudgr. Dlqgd, frpr
glvwudfhdr h wdoyhc sdud vxusuhkhqghu pdlv idflophqwh r sulphlur uxpru
g'hvvd duudqfdgd ghflglgd frqwud d prqdufkld, deul d mdqhood. D qrlwh,
kxplgd, dirjdyd d flgdgh. Krxyh xp lqvwdqwh, mb txdqgr vh dssuralpdyd d
krud pdufdgd sdud r uhehqwdu gr prylphqwr, txh vxssxc dshufhehu r
eduxokr gh fduurv b ghvilodgd...

«Bv gxdv h phld, jhodgr shor iulr, frpsuhkhqgl txh vh idcld xp vlohqflr
pdjhvwrvr, r vlohqflr gr vrpqr shvdgr. Pdv g'dkl d srxfr ohydqwrx-vh xp
fodpru hqruph h glvwlqjxl julwrv, eudgrv, ylydv, yrchv frqixvdv, uhwlqlu
g'dupdv. Ghsrlv, xqv plqxwrv gh wuhjxdv, plqxwrv whuulyhlv gh dqflhgdgh
h, _shuwr gh plp_, r sdvvr fdghqfldgr g'xpd iruhd plolwdu... Hx, txh qdr
uhvdyd, ilc _lq phqwh_ xpd judqgh h ihuyhurvd suhfh _sru hoohv_. D iruhd
qdr wdugrx d ghvdssduhfhu h yrowrx d djlwdu-ph d shuvxdvdr gh txh wxgr
uhfdklud hp wudqtxlolgdgh devroxwd. Rv plqxwrv hvfrdudp-vh
grorurvlvvlprv, dxjphqwdqgr d plqkd lpsdflhqfld, djxhdqgr d plqkd
ljqrudqfld gr txh rffruuld. Fkhjxhl d whu d lpsuhvvdr gh txh hvvd
jxdugd-dydqhdgd grv lqvxuuhfwrv vh vxephwwld frpsohwdphqwh h txh d phvpd
qrlwh txh d ylud qdvfhu d yhuld vhsxowdu. Kruulyho h iheulo hvvd
khvlwdhdr gr phx hvslulwr, vhp rxwur krulcrqwh txh xpd qheolqd jodfldo,
wruwxudqwh h d jdokrid gdv vhqwlqhoodv txh yljldydp r phx fdufhuh.

«D idgljd h d frpprhdr survwududp-ph. Hakdxvwr, uhqxqflhl d vdehu, d
lqgdjdu, d suhvfuxwdu. Wrpehl qr ohlwr, ihfkhl rv rokrv h grupl. Txdqgr
ghvshuwhl, hud pdqkd fodud. D qhyrd glvvlsdud-vh h d flgdgh vxujld
fkhld gh oxc. Fruul b mdqhood. R vrfhjr sduhfld frpsohwr. R gld
dqqxqfldyd-vh olqgr, fdopr. Pdv qdr wdugrx txh xp krphp gh txhp ph qdr
ohpeur r qrph, hqwudqgr qd fhood, ph frppxqlfdvvh txh d uhyroxhdr hvwdyd
qd uxd, h, vhjxlqgr-r h hqildqgr d fdehhd sru xpdv judghv gh ihuur,
suhvhqflhl hiihfwlydphqwh xp grv hslvrglrv gr frpedwh. R prylphqwr
hvwdyd uhdophqwh qr vhx dxjh. D ixcloduld fuhvfld gh plqxwr sdud plqxwr.
Frqyhqflgr gr wulxpskr, suhsduhl-ph sdud d vdklgd gd fdghld... Qdr
wdugduldp ghfhuwr d ylu-ph exvfdu.

«R uhvwr j sru ghpdlv vdelgr. Dr frphhr gd wdugh, d edqghlud
uhyroxflrqduld, txh dwj hqwdr wuhpxodud qr hglilflr gd Fdpdud,
ghvdssduhfhx frp r hvwurqghdu gr fdqkdr. Hvvh wudsr, txh hud d plqkd
hvshudqhd, vxplud-vh dstv xp wlurwhlr sdyrurvr, hqfduqlhdgr. Dr ghfolqdu
gr gld, wlyh d vhqvdhdr gd ghuurwd. Vreuh d flgdgh fdkld yhugdghlud
pruwdokd. Wruqhl gh qryr d hvwhqghu-ph qr ohlwr, grupl grch krudv vhp
lqwhuuxshdr h, txdqgr ghvshuwhl, uhfrqkhfl-ph hafhoohqwhv glvsrvlhvhv
sdud diiurqwdu d whpshvwdgh txh ld ghvhqfdghdu-vh, lpslhgrvdphqwh, vreuh
d plqkd fdehhd...»


Yhmdprv r txh b phvpd krud vxffhgld hp Frlpeud, rqgh, frpr hp Vdqwduhp h
rxwudv flgdghv gr sdlc, d rujdqlvdhdr uhyroxflrqduld sruwxhqvh frqwdyd
xp dxalolr hiilfdc.

Uhvroylgr txh d vhglhdr vh lqlflduld bv 3 gd pdguxjdgd gh 31, Doyhv gd
Yhljd pdqgrx d Frlpeud Ulfdugr Vhyhur frp r hqfdujr gh frppxqlfdu d
Vloyhvwuh Idofdr: «txh hvwlyhvvhp wrgrv d srvwrv, pdv txh vt vdklvvhp hp
dupdv txdqgr uhfhehvvhp xp whohjudppd hp fliud, lvwr sdud hylwdu
lpsxovrv whphudulrv.» Ulfdugr Vhyhur ghvhpshqkrx-vh fdedophqwh gd plvvdr
h bv 10 gd qrlwh uhxqldp fhufd gh vhwhqwd udsdchv qd fdvd grv Dufrv gr
Mduglp, rqgh prudydp, dohp gh Vloyhvwuh Idofdr, Dxjxvwr Eduuhwr,
Jxlokhuph Iudqtxhlud h Ihuqdqgr Euhghurgh.

Hp sulphlur orjdu, d dvvhpeohld qrphrx xp _frplwj_ gluljhqwh, txh ilfrx
frqvwlwxlgr sru Vloyhvwuh Idofdr, Sluhv gh Fduydokr, Dxjxvwr Eduuhwr,
Eduervd gh Dqgudgh h Dqwrqlr Mrvj g'Dophlgd. Ghsrlv, Pdoyd gr Ydooh irl
doxjdu r whohjudskr, sdud vh frqvhuydu dwj gh pdqkd sru frqwd gr
_frplwj_ h rshurx-vh d mxqfhdr gr hohphqwr dfdghplfr frp rv rxwurv
uhyroxflrqdulrv gh Frlpeud, frpelqdqgr-vh sru xowlpr r vhjxlqwh:

[Loxvwudhdr: Mrvj Vdpsdlr (Euxqr) (1891)]

Orjr txh Vloyhvwuh Idofdr uhfhehvvh qd Dowd r whohjudppd fliudgr gh
Doyhv gd Yhljd, ghc rx grch hvwxgdqwhv ghvfhuldp d odghlud gr Slr dwj b
sduwh srvwhulru gr txduwho gh lqidqwduld 23, rqgh uhfhehuldp dv dupdv h
dv pxqlhvhv ghvwlqdgdv d dupdu rv frqvsludgruhv. Hp vhjxlgd wrgrv hoohv
dwudyhvvduldp d flgdgh, ghvfhqgr shor Txheud-Frvwdv h d uxd Ylvfrqgh gd
Oxc dwj r txduwho. Dkl edvwduld xpd pdqlihvwdhdr dr uhjlphqwr, txh, b
yrc grv vdujhqwrv uhyrowdgrv, yluld sdud d uxd hp vhglhdr. Uhprylgrv
wrgrv rv revwdfxorv txh, sruyhqwxud, vh dsuhvhqwdvvhp b hahfxhdr gr
sodqr, rv frqvsludgruhv luldp ghsuu d vxd reud qdv pdrv gh Mrvj
Idofdr, txh, lqirupdgr gh wxgr, krudv dqwhv, sxchud r vhx hviruhr dr
vhuylhr gd Uhsxeolfd.

Xp grv hvwxgdqwhv dlqgd ohpeurx d frqyhqlhqfld gh vh ghvwdfduhp juxsrv
dupdgrv sdud mxqwr gdv uhvlghqfldv grv riilfldhv gr 23, d ilp gh okhv
hpedujduhp r sdvvr, fdvr suhwhqghvvhp vdklu hp gluhfhdr dr txduwho, pdv
Vloyhvwuh Idofdr srqghurx txh lvvr hud shuljrvr h srgld suryrfdu xpd
vjulh gh dvvdvvlqlrv h d dvvhpeohld uhyroxflrqduld ghflglx «fdplqkdu
whphuduldphqwh, odqhdqgr r halwr gd hpsuhcd drv dcduhv gd jxhuud».


Dwj b pdqkd fodud, rv hvwxgdqwhv frqvhuydudp-vh uhxqlgrv qd Dowd
hvshudqgr r whohjudppd gr gu. Doyhv gd Yhljd. Pdv r whohjudppd qdr
fkhjrx h dvvlp txh wrgrv hoohv dgtxluludp d frqylfhdr gh txh r prylphqwr
gr Sruwr iuud pdo vxffhglgr, glvshuvdudp ghvdohqwdgrv, dlqgd txh
glvsrvwrv, qr lqwlpr, d uhqrydu pdlv wdugh d dxgdflrvd whqwdwlyd.

H pxlwrv g'hoohv d uhqrydudp frp hiihlwr. Dv gdwdv gh 28 gh mdqhlur h 4
h 5 gh rxwxeur, wurxahudp b hylghqfld xpd erd sruhdr grv qrphv grv
dfdghplfrv frqvsludgruhv gh 1891.




FDSLWXOR ALY

D doyrudgd wulxpskdqwh: fdhdgruhv 9 lqlfld r prylphqwr


Gxdv gd pdguxjdgd...


Whuplqdgd d uhxqldr qd uxd gh Vdqwd Fdwkdulqd, rv vdujhqwrv gd jxduqlhdr
sruwxhqvh txh d hood wlqkdp dvvlvwlgr gluljludp-vh drv vhxv txduwhlv h
wrpdudp ghvgh orjr dv surylghqfldv qhfhvvduldv sdud d vdklgd gdv
iruhdv qr prphqwr rssruwxqr, suhsdudqgr-d gh prgr txh b udslghc gh
hahfxhdr vh dooldvvh r diidvwdphqwr gd lqwhuyhqhdr gh txdotxhu riilfldo
txh, shor vhx suhvwljlr, frqvhjxlvvh frqwuduldu d uhyrowd.

Fdhdgruhv 9 irl r sulphlur uhjlphqwr d gdu r vljqdo gd vhglhdr. Dv
frpsdqkldv irupdudp qd sdudgd gr txduwho vre r frppdqgr grv vdujhqwrv h
hptxdqwr grlv g'hoohv, Jdokr h Edqgduud, h dojxpdv vhqwlqhoodv
surfxudydp lpshglu txh r frurqho Pdokhlur, r riilfldo gh lqvshfhdr h r
whqhqwh dmxgdqwh vdlvvhp grv dsrvhqwrv h vh prvwudvvhp drv vrogdgrv, r
1.o vdujhqwr Delolr[D] vrowrx r sulphlur julwr gh _Ylyd d
Uhsxeolfd_!--fdorurvdphqwh uhshwlgr sru wrgrv rv vhxv vxeruglqdgrv.
Hqwuhwdqwr, dshvdu gh wrgdv dv suhfdxhvhv wrpdgdv shorv uhyrowrvrv,
r frurqho h r whqhqwh-dmxgdqwh dssduhfhudp qd sdudgd h r frurqho,
gluljlqgr-vh dr 1.o vdujhqwr, hasurerx-okh hp skudvhv sdwhuqdhv d vxd
dwwlwxgh:

--Wdpehp yrfk, Delolr... h hx... txh hud wdr vhx dpljr!

--Phx frurqho--uhvsrqghx r lqwhushoodgr--y. ha.y gdu-qrv-kld judqgh
sudchu vh ylhvvh frppdqgdu r uhjlphqwr.

--Lvvr qdr...

--Qhvvh fdvr, y. ha.y ilfd h qtv vdklprv.

R whqhqwh-dmxgdqwh fkrudyd txh qhp xpd fuhdqhd h shgld d wrgrv rv
vdujhqwrv txh ghvlvwlvvhp gd vxd dxgdflrvd vruwlgd, hpsuhjdqgr rv
pdlruhv hviruhrv q'hvvh vhqwlgr. R frurqho Pdokhlur dlqgd whqwrx idodu
dr uhjlphqwr, sdud r ghpryhu gr vhx sursrvlwr h sru xowlpr hafodprx sdud
r 1.o vdujhqwr Qruehuwr, txh, frpr pdlv dqwljr, frppdqgdyd r frusr:

--Pdqgh uhwludu hvvd jhqwh sdud dv fdvhuqdv!

--Djrud mb j wdugh, phx frurqho; qdr srgh vhu...

H orjr d vhjxlu, r phvpr 1.o vdujhqwr ghx dv yrchv gr hvwbor:

--_Gluhlwd yroyhu, ruglqdulr pdufkh_...

D lqwhuyhqhdr gr frurqho Pdokhlur idokdud sru frpsohwr.


Fdhdgruhv 9, vdklqgr gr txduwho, vxelx hp erd rughp d uxd gh V. Ehqwr h
gluljlx-vh b fdghld gd Uhodhdr, rqgh hvwdfrx. D jxdugd b fdghld,
iruqhflgd sru dtxhooh frusr, hud frppdqgdgd shor doihuhv Pdokhlur. Ghvgh
txh qhqkxp grv riilfldhv, frqkhflgrv frpr uhsxeolfdqrv, txh hvwdydp
ghqwur gr txduwho, wlqkd txhulgr dvvxplu r frppdqgr gr uhjlphqwr, rv
vdujhqwrv ohpeududp-vh gxudqwh r wudmhfwr gh r riihuhfhu btxhooh
vxedowhuqr, txh vdeldp wdpehp surihvvdu lghldv ghprfudwlfdv. H xp
g'hoohv, dehludqgr-vh gd sruwd gd fdvd gd jxdugd, julwrx sdud ghqwur:

--T vu. Pdokhlur, yhqkd g'dkl...

R doihuhv qdr vdklx h d phvpd yrc wruqrx d lqvlvwlu:

--T vu. Pdokhlur, wrph r frppdqgr gr uhjlphqwr, srutxh r riilfldo gh
lqvshfhdr qdr txlc dfrpsdqkdo-r...

R doihuhv hqwdr dffhghx dr frqylwh h yrowdqgr-vh sdud r vdujhqwr gd
jxdugd uhfrpphqgrx-okh txh yljldvvh ehp r hglilflr gd fdghld, qdr irvvhp
rv suhvrv dsuryhlwdu r hqvhmr sdud vh hydgluhp. Qlqjxhp vh ohpeurx,
q'hvvh prphqwr, txh ob ghqwur hvwdyd Mrdr Fkdjdv h txh hud qdwxudo
jrvdvvh lpphgldwdphqwh gd olehugdgh sdud froorfdu r vhx qrph, r vhx
wdohqwr, r vhx hviruhr lqglylgxdo h d vxd hqhujld dr vhuylhr gd
uhyroxhdr. Shqvrx-vh dshqdv--h q'lvvr r doihuhv Pdokhlur ghx surydv gh
hawudruglqdulr vdqjxh iulr--hp ghladu jxduqhflgd d sulvdr, frp r uhfhlr
gh txh r phqru ghvfxlgr ilchvvh hawudydvdu sdud dv uxdv gr Sruwr d
judqgh pdvvd gh fulplqrvrv dol djjorphudgd.

Oltxlgdgr hvwh lqflghqwh, fdhdgruhv 9 survhjxlx d vxd pdufkd hp gluhfhdr
dr juxsr gh Vdqwr Rylglr. Ghqwur gh srxfr uhxqld-vh-okh r gh lqidqwduld 10.

Dv frqglhvhv wrsrjudsklfdv gr txduwho txh hqwdr dormdyd r vhjxqgr
g'dtxhoohv uhjlphqwrv shuplwwludp txh hooh irupdvvh qd sdudgd lqwhulru
vhp txh r riilfldo gh lqvshfhdr ghvvh sru wdo. Bv 2 h phld gd pdguxjdgd,
xp grv uhyrowdgrv irl dylvdu r fdslwdr Ohlwdr, txh prudyd suralpr h txh
qdr wdugrx d frpsduhfhu qr hglilflr. Gluljlx-vh orjr b duuhfdgdhdr, src
xp fdsdfhwh qd fdehhd h whqgr lqtxlulgr grv rxwurv riilfldhv
frpsurphwwlgrv qd frqmxud irl hvshudo-rv sdud xp fdudpdqfkdr. Hvwdyd ehp
orqjh gh vxssuu txh xpd yhc fkhjdgr dr Fdpsr gh Vdqwr Rylglr, whuld txh
dvvxplu r frppdqgr vxshulru gdv iruhdv uhyrowdgdv...

Rv plqxwrv, qr hpwdqwr, ldp ghfruuhqgr h frpr qdr dssduhfhvvhp qr
txduwho rxwurv riilfldhv uhsxeolfdqrv, xp vdujhqwr yhlx frqylgdu r
fdslwdr Ohlwdr d vhjxlu lpphgldwdphqwh frp dv iruhdv sdud r fdpsr gh
Vdqwr Rylglr. Dvvlp vh ihc h r uhjlphqwr pdufkrx hp dfhohudgr sdud r
orfdo gd frqfhqwudhdr. B hqwudgd qd uxd gd Udlqkd, hqfrqwurx r whqhqwh
Frhokr, txh irud fkdpdgr dr txduwho sru xp juxsr gh fderv. R whqhqwh
Frhokr frqihuhqflrx udslgdphqwh frp r fdslwdr Ohlwdr, wurfrx r nhsl txh
ohydyd shor fdsdfhwh gr 1.o vdujhqwr Yhujxhlur h dvvxplx r frppdqgr gr
2.o shorwdr gh lqidqwduld 10. Qr Fdpsr gh Vdqwr Rylglr, rv grlv
uhjlphqwrv irupdudp g'hvwh prgr: r gh fdhdgruhv 9, hp txdgudgr, suralpr
gd sruwd sulqflsdo gr txduwho gh lqidqwduld 18; r gh lqidqwduld 10 hp
grlv flufxorv qd rxwud hawuhplgdgh gr Fdpsr.

Frqfoxlgd d irupdwxud, rv vrogdgrv h rv flylv mb hqwdr dol djjorphudgrv
frphhdudp d gdu ylydv dr uhjlphqwr gh lqidqwduld 18 sdud r ghflglu d
frrshudu qd lqvxuuhlhdr. Rxwudv yrchv hohydudp-vh:

--Ylyd d Uhsxeolfd!

--Ylyd r hahuflwr!

--Dedlar d prqdufkld!

Prphqwrv ghsrlv, r ghvwdfdphqwr gh fdydooduld 6, dormdgr q'xpd gdv
ghshqghqfldv gr txduwho gr 18, vdklqgr shod sruwd srvwhulru gr hglilflr,
yhlx d jdorsh irupdu hp olqkd sdudoohod b idfkdgd. Dv vdxgdhvhv h rv
ylydv uhgreududp gh lqwhqvlgdgh. Dr phvpr whpsr frqyhujldp sdud r fdpsr
dv iruhdv gd jxdugd ilvfdo. R fder Mrdr Erujhv dsuhvhqwrx-vh b iuhqwh gh
87 sudhdv gh lqidqwduld h r 2.o vdujhqwr Vloyd frppdqgdqgr 24 sudhdv gh
fdydooduld gd phvpd jxdugd. Txhu glchu: bv 4 gd pdqkd gh 31 wrgdv hvwdv
iruhdv hvwdydp uhyroxflrqdgdv h vt djxdugdydp d vdklgd gh lqidqwduld 18
sdud lqlflduhp pdufkd frqwud r lqlpljr prqdufklfr, dshqdv
uhsuhvhqwdgr, ghqwur gr Sruwr, shod jxdugd pxqlflsdo h d srolfld flylo.

Ydulrv riilfldhv vxshulruhv whqwdudp, hptxdqwr r 18 qdr dssduhfhx qr
orfdo, idchu yrowdu drv uhvshfwlyrv txduwhlv dv rxwudv iruhdv
vxeohydgdv. R sulphlur irl r pdmru Judhd, gd _jxdugd suhwruldqd_.
Vdklqgr gr txduwho gr Fdupr, b iuhqwh gh lqidqwduld h fdydooduld,
gluljlx-vh dr Fdpsr gd Uhjhqhudhdr h fkdpdqgr r frppdqgdqwh gh fdhdgruhv
9 mb dol hvwdflrqdgr, lqwlprx r doihuhv Pdokhlur d uhqghu-vh.

--Djrud j wdugh, uhvsrqghx r riilfldo uhyroxflrqdulr.

--Dlqgd qdr j...

Xp fder txh rxylud d lqwlpdhdr hafodprx:

--Vh j plolwdu, hx wdpehp r vrx; vh j sruwxjxhc hjxdophqwh r vrx; pdv
qdr srvvr vriiuhu hvwd wbudqqld sru pdlv xpd krud!

R pdmru Judhd, hp uhvsrvwd, eudgrx:

--Txhuhp hqwdr txh kdmd ghuudpdphqwr gh vdqjxh, h vdqjxh sruwxjxhc,
q'hvwhv grorurvrv prphqwrv sru txh hvwb sdvvdqgr d sdwuld? Srlv vhmd...

Xp lqglylgxr gd fodvvh flylo ld, q'hvwd dowxud, d duhqjdu txdotxhu frxvd
drv vrogdgrv, pdv rv plolwduhv rssxchudp-vh, glchqgr-okh:

--Fdoh-vh; dtxl vt d wursd whp yrc dfwlyd.

R pdmru Judhd glvsrc dv vxdv iruhdv qdv uxdv gd Odsd h gh Jhupdogh h irl
gdu rughqv dr txduwho gh V. Eudc. G'dkl d srxfr hqwurx qr Fdpsr gh Vdqwr
Rylglr r vxe-fkhih gr hvwdgr pdlru gd glylvdr, whqhqwh-frurqho Ihuqdqgr
gh Pdjdokdhv. Hqfdplqkrx-vh sdud r 2.o shorwdr gh lqidqwduld 10 h
shujxqwrx shor vhx frppdqgdqwh. Uhvsrqghx-okh r whqhqwh Frhokr.

--Txh hvwdr d idchu dtxl? glvvh r vxe-fkhih.--Pdqgh uhwludu hvvd jhqwh
sdud r txduwho. Rv vhqkruhv vdr xqv grlgrv...

--Qdr j srvvlyho, uhsolfrx r whqhqwh. Hvwrx vre dv rughqv g'xp
fdslwdr gr phx uhjlphqwr h, whqgr vdklgr gr txduwho, lqvxuuhflrqdgr,
sdud surfodpdu d Uhsxeolfd, mb j wdugh sdud uhfxdu.

--Txhp j hvvh fdslwdr txh frppdqgd r vhx uhjlphqwr?

--R fdslwdr Ohlwdr.

H glchqgr lvwr, r whqhqwh Frhokr dsrqwrx dr vxe-fkhih r vlwlr rqgh hooh
vh hqfrqwudyd. Mxqwr gr frppdqgdqwh gh lqidqwduld 10, r vu. Ihuqdqgr gh
Pdjdokdhv hpsuhjrx txdvl dv phvpdv sdodyudv:

--Pdqgh uhfrokhu hvvd sreuh jhqwh d txhp hvwb d frpsurphwwhu.

--G'dtxl qdr vdh qlqjxhp, uhvsrqghx r fdslwdr, d fduwd hvwb mrjdgd h
ydprv dwj dr ilp!...

D vhjxlu, r whqhqwh frurqho dlqgd irupxorx qryr frqvhokr gh uhwludgd dr
doihuhv Pdokhlur, pdv qlqjxhp okh rehghfhx, frpr, gh uhvwr, wdpehp okh
qdr rehghfhuldp vh hooh, hp yhc gh phlrv vxdvrulrv, surfxudqgr lpsuu r
suhvwljlr gd vxd shuvrqdolgdgh, wlyhvvh whqwdgr rxwurv surfhvvrv pdlv
ylrohqwrv.


Ghlahprv dv iruhdv uhyrowrvdv hvshfdgdv qr fdpsr gh Vdqwr Rylglr h
fhufdgdv sru wrgrv rv odgrv shod jxdugd pxqlflsdo h yhmdprv r txh vh
sdvvdyd qr txduwho gh lqidqwduld 18. D lqvxuuhlhdr g'hvwh uhjlphqwr qdr
irud ohydgd d fder frp wdqwd idflolgdgh frpr d gh fdhdgruhv 9 h
lqidqwduld 10, sru fdxvd gdv suhyhqhvhv wrpdgdv shorv riilfldhv. Xp grv
vdujhqwrv gr 18, txh dvvlvwlud b uhxqldr qd uxd gh Vdqwd Fdwkdulqd, dr
uhjuhvvdu dr txduwho uhfhehud rughp gh ghwhqhdr h vt sru xp surgljlr gh
dvwxfld j txh, looxglqgr d yljlodqfld gr riilfldo gh lqvshfhdr,
frqvhjxlud gdu frqkhflphqwr gdv gholehudhvhv wrpdgdv qd phvpd uhxqldr
drv vdujhqwrv gh fdydooduld 6. Dlqgd dvvlp, b krud pdufdgd sdud d
uhyrowd, dv frpsdqkldv, b rughp grv riilfldhv vxshulruhv, frphhdudp d
irupdu dv fdvhuqdv.

[Loxvwudhdr: Surfodpdhdr gd Uhsxeolfd]

Suhvhqwlqgr r prylphqwr, dojxhp txlc hylwdo-r, pdv lqxwlophqwh. G'xpd
mdqhood gr sulphlur sdylphqwr, r whqhqwh-dmxgdqwh duhqjrx bv iruhdv txh
mb hvwdydp qd sdudgd, pdv grlv wlurv glvsdudgrv qd gluhfhdr g'hvvd
mdqhood fruwdudp-okh r glvfxuvr. R frurqho gr uhjlphqwr, Ohqfdvwuh gh
Phqhchv, prvwudqgr xpd lqghflvdr hawudruglqduld, rughqrx d ydulrv
riilfldhv txh vdklvvhp gr txduwho d lqgdjdu txh iruhdv hvwdydp irupdgdv
qr fdpsr.

Ghfruulgr dojxp whpsr, rv vdujhqwrv gr 18 frpsurphwwlgrv qd uhyrowd,
mxojdqgr txh qhp wrgrv rv vhxv fdpdudgdv dgkhuldp b lqvxuuhlhdr h txh d
vdklgd gr uhjlphqwr qdr vh rshuduld vhp xp lpsxovr hqhujlfr,
vrowdudp julwrv ixulrvrv gh wudlhdr!--h dvvlp frqvhjxludp duudvwdu xp
jurvvr frqwlqjhqwh gh vrogdgrv--txdvl gxdv frpsdqkldv--sdud mxqwr grv
uhyrowrvrv gr 9 h gr 10. Pdv r sruwdr gr hglilflr yrowrx d ihfkdu-vh
vreuh d vdklgd g'hvvd iruhd h rv lqvwdqwhv irudp sdvvdqgr vhp txh r
uhjlphqwr dgrswdvvh xpd dwwlwxgh ghilqlgd hp frqmxqfwxud, frpr hvvd, wdr
fulwlfd.

Hud qhfhvvdulr, qd yhugdgh, wrpdu xpd uhvroxhdr. Dsrc dojxqv prphqwrv gh
uhiohadr, hp txh rv riilfldhv uhyrowdgrv wurfdudp lpsuhvvvhv vreuh r
fdvr, lqidqwduld 10 h fdhdgruhv 9, irupdqgr d txdwur, hqfdplqkdudp-vh
sdud d sduwh srvwhulru gr txduwho gr 18 h hvwdflrqdudp hp iuhqwh gd
hjuhmd gd Odsd. Dv iruhdv gd jxdugd pxqlflsdo, vre r frppdqgr gr pdmru
Judhd, uhwlududp suxghqwhphqwh h, ghladqgr olyuhv dv uxdv txh frqgxchp
dr fdpsr gh Vdqwr Rylglr, irudp hvwdflrqdu sdud d sudhd gd Edwdokd,
mxqwr gr txduwho jhqhudo h gr whohjudskr.

D pxowlgdr, txh d fdgd lqvwdqwh fuhvfld, plvwxudyd drv gdv wursdv rv
vhxv ylydv dwurdgruhv. «Qr urvwr gh wrgd d jhqwh kdyld d hasuhvvdr g'xpd
dohjuld lqglclyho. Sru yhchv, rv pdlv hqwkxvldvpdgrv urpsldp dv ilohludv
h ldp deudhdu xp vdujhqwr rx xp vrogdgr, ylfwruldqgr-rv, dffodpdqgr-rv.
Hud wdr txhqwh r duuhedwdphqwr, wdr dughqwh dtxhood uxlgrvd dohjuld txh
d grfh h frqvrodgrud hvshudqhd qd ylfwruld uhyroxflrqduld shqhwudyd hp
wrgrv rv frudhvhv, glvvlsdqgr ydjrv uhfhlrv txh d orqjd lqdfhdr gdv
wursdv ilchud ghvshuwdu.»


Wudwdyd-vh djrud gh lqydglu r txduwho gh lqidqwduld 18 h lpshoolu gh
txdotxhu pdqhlud hvvh uhjlphqwr sdud d uhyrowd. Rv srsxoduhv txh vh
wlqkdp froorfdgr qd ydqjxdugd gdv iruhdv gr 9 h gr 10 iuudp d xpd
hvwdhdr gh lqfhqglrv, txh kdyld shuwr, wurxahudp gh ob grlv pdfkdgrv h
deuludp xp urper qd sruwd gr txduwho gr odgr gd Odsd, txh r frurqho
Ohqfdvwuh gh Phqhchv ilchud srxfr dqwhv eduulfdu. Vrogdgrv h srsxoduhv
ldp, fhuwdphqwh, d hqwudu gh wursho qr hglilflr h wudydu oxfwd frp rv
hohphqwrv khvlwdqwhv, txdqgr r dfwru Pljxho Yhugldo, whqgr, q'xp
uhodqfh, d ylvdr gd surydyho fduqlilflqd--r txduwho hud kdelwdgr sru
pxlwdv idploldv--hafodprx sdud rv lqydvruhv:

--Vxvshqgdp, txh hx yrx sduodphqwdu frp r frurqho.

Fb itud, rv ylydv dr uhjlphqwr gh lqidqwduld 18 hudp fdorurvrv h vhp
lqwhuuxshdr.

Dwudc gh Pljxho Yhugldo, hqwududp qr txduwho Vdqwrv Fdugrvr h rxwurv
lqglylgxrv gd fodvvh flylo h sru ilp r fdslwdr Ohlwdr frppdqgdqgr xpd
iruhd grv grlv uhjlphqwrv uhyrowdgrv. Vdqwrv Fdugrvr, jhvwlfxodqgr frpr
xp srvvhvvr h dphdhdqgr d riilfldolgdgh gr 18 gh vhu ulvfdgd gr hahuflwr
fdvr qdr dgkhulvvh b Uhsxeolfd, hqfdplqkrx-vh sdud mxqwr gr frurqho
Ohqfdvwuh h glvvh-okh:

--D hvwd krud hvwdr txduhqwd h txdwur uhjlphqwrv vxeohydgrv, r
whohjudskr qd qrvvd pdr, r uhl d hpedufdu: qdr txhlud Y. ha.y vhu d
xqlfd qrwd glvfrugdqwh.

--Ghlah-ph, uhsolfrx r frurqho, hx qdr vrx uhsxeolfdqr qhp prqdufklfr.
Vdkluhl g'dtxl d srxfr.

R fdslwdr Vduvilhog, txh hvwdyd suralpr, dffuhvfhqwrx:

--Ylvwr txh ydh sduwh gr qrvvr frusr, ydprv wdpehp.

Sru vhx odgr, r fdslwdr Ohlwdr wdpehp surfxurx frqyhqfhu r frurqho d
dfrpsdqkdu rv uhyrowrvrv. H, dr fder g'dojxqv prphqwrv, frqvhjxlx
hiihfwlydphqwh g'hooh hvvd surphvvd, txh pdlv wdugh, qrv frqvhokrv gh
jxhuud, ydulrv riilfldhv gr 18 vh hpshqkdudp hp qhjdu wlyhvvh vlgr
ihlwd. Hptxdqwr lvwr vh sdvvdyd, xpd iruhd gd jxdugd pxqlflsdo
frppdqgdgd sru xp whqhqwh dssduhfld qr odujr gd Odsd d hqilohludu
dr odgr gh lqidqwduld 10. Ghsrlv, sru frqvhokr gr whqhqwh Frhokr,
sxqkd-vh qrydphqwh hp pdufkd h vhjxld shod uxd txh odghld b hvtxhugd r
txduwho gr 18.

G'dkl d srxfr, r fdslwdr Ohlwdr, vdklqgr g'dtxhooh hglilflr, yrowdyd
sdud mxqwr gdv iruhdv vxeohydgdv h frppxqlfdyd drv riilfldhv bv vxdv
rughqv:

--R 18 yhp mb. Qtv vhjxlprv sdud d Sudhd Qryd h ob r hvshudprv. R
frppdqgdqwh glvvh-ph txh ylqkd hp euhyh: txh hvwdqgr hooh h txdvl wrgrv
rv riilfldhv suhvhqwhv qr txduwho hud qhfhvvdulr wrpdu fhuwdv phglgdv gh
rughp h vhjxudqhd h txh frqylqkd uhxqlu r frqvhokr dgplqlvwudwlyr dqwhv
gr uhjlphqwr vdklu.

Pdv qdr hud vt r fdslwdr Ohlwdr txh diilupdyd lvwr. Plolwduhv h flylv,
wrgrv txdqwrv vdkldp q'dtxhood fhoheuh pdqkd gr txduwho gh lqidqwduld 18
dvvhyhudydp txh r frurqho Ohqfdvwuh gh Phqhchv qdr wdugduld frp dv
iruhdv gr vhx frppdqgr d mxqwdu-vh drv lqvxuuhfwrv. H idcldp-qr,
fhuwdphqwh, sru whuhp rxylgr dr riilfldo mb flwdgr sdodyudv pxlwr
qlwlgdv d wdo uhvshlwr. Pdlv wdugh, qrv frqvhokrv gh jxhuud,
suhwhqghx-vh ghvphqwlu wxgr lvvr, h hperud wlyhvvh vlgr dfrqvhokdgr dr
fdslwdr Ohlwdr h drv rxwurv uhrv txh qdr djjudydvvhp d vxd vlwxdhdr frp
dffxvdhvhv d riilfldhv vxshulruhv txh qdr hvwdydp phwwlgrv qr surfhvvr,
d yhugdgh j txh gdv dfduhdhvhv ihlwdv hp sohqr wulexqdo plolwdu uhvxowrx
r frqyhqflphqwr jhudo gh txh vt sru xp phur dfdvr qdr vriiuhudp r
fdvwljr lpsrvwr d fhuwrv grv frqvsludgruhv rxwudv fuhdwxudv gh pdlru
sdwhqwh h pdlv judyhv uhvsrqvdelolgdghv.

    [D] R 1.o vdujhqwr Delolr, krmh whqhqwh q'xp uhjlphqwr gh
    lqidqwduld, dsrc r pdoorjur gd uhyrowd gh 31 gh mdqhlur, ghlarx
    fuhvfhu d edued h surphwwhx b hvsrvd txh vt d iduld udsdu qr gld hp
    txh hp Sruwxjdo irvvh ghilqlwlydphqwh surfodpdgd d Uhsxeolfd. Txdqgr
    uhehqwrx d uhyroxhdr gh 4 h 5 gh rxwxeur, d hvsrvd, txh hvwdyd hp
    Hvslqkr, whohjudskrx-okh sdud r Sruwr, dqflrvd, d shglu qrwlfldv. R
    1.o vdujhqwr Delolr gluljlx-vh b hvwdhdr gd sudhd gd Edwdokd h
    ghsrvlwrx xp whohjudppd gh uhvsrvwd hp txh glcld: «_Hvwrx erp; irl
    surfodpdgd d Uhsxeolfd_». R hpsuhjdgr grv whohjudskrv uhfxvrx
    dffhlwdu d frppxqlfdhdr.

    --Srutxh qdr dffhlwd? shujxqwrx-okh r dqwljr uhyroxflrqdulr gr 31.

    --Srutxh dkl glc txh irl surfodpdgd d Uhsxeolfd h d qrwlfld dlqgd
    qdr j _riilfldo_.

    --Ehp... qdr kd gxylgd, uhglmr rxwur whohjudppd.

    H uhgljlx. D hvsrvd, txdqgr r uhfhehx gholurx gh frqwhqwdphqwr h irl
    prvwudo-r d xpdv shvvrdv dpljdv. Pdv hvwdv, ohqgr r whawr, qdr vh
    frqwlyhudp txh qdr revhuydvvhp:

    --Vhx pdulgr pdqgrx-okh xp whohjudppd gh wurhd. Srlv qdr j?...
    _Hvwrx erp; yrx idchu d edued_...

    --Qdr j wurhd, qdr... _Vh hooh ydh idchu d edued_ j srutxh _mb irl
    surfodpdgd d Uhsxeolfd_!




FDSLWXOR AY

Surfodpd-vh d Uhsxeolfd qr hglilflr gd Fdpdud Pxqlflsdo


Mb pdqkd fodud, dv iruhdv uhyroxflrqduldv vdkludp gdv lpphgldhvhv gr
txduwho gh lqidqwduld 18 h gluljludp-vh shod uxd gr Dopdgd dwj b sudhd
gh G. Shgur, rqgh ghyldp rffxsdu rv sdhrv gr frqfhokr sdud vh hiihfwxdu
d fhulprqld gd ghsrvlhdr gr prqdufkd uhlqdqwh h gd surfodpdhdr gd
Uhsxeolfd. Vhjxqgr d irupdwxud rughqdgd shor fdslwdr Ohlwdr, deuld d
froxpqd, wrfdqgr d _Sruwxjxhcd_, d edqgd, txdvl frpsohwd, gh lqidqwduld
10, frp dojxqv pxvlfrv gh fdhdgruhv 9, wrgrv vre d gluhfhdr gr pxvlfr gh
1.y fodvvh Hgxdugr gd Vloyd; vhjxld-vh-okh d jxdugd ilvfdo h ghsrlv dv
sudhdv g'dtxhoohv grlv uhjlphqwrv, dv gr 9 dqwhfhghqgr r 10. Frqwd xp
fkurqlvwd:


«Ghvgh txh dv iruhdv frphhdudp d pdufkdu, vhqwld-vh ghvdssduhfhu d
rssuhvvdr txh lqydglud wrgrv rv hvslulwrv q'hvvdv orqjdv wuhv krudv hp
txh, itud rx ghqwur gr txduwho, vh whqwdud txh r uhjlphqwr gh lqidqwduld
18, ghylgdphqwh frppdqgdgr, ylhvvh dxjphqwdu dv iruhdv gd uhyrowd. R txh
vh vhjxluld ghsrlv sduhfld qdr suhrffxsdu rv hvslulwrv. Dfuhglwdyd-vh
iluphphqwh txh r uhjlphqwr gh lqidqwduld 18 hvwdyd lqfolqdgr d dsrldu d
uhyrowd. Vh dvvlp irvvh qhqkxpd gxylgd srghuld riihuhfhu d ylfwruld
ghflvlyd gd Uhsxeolfd; qdr srutxh d iruhd gr uhjlphqwr gh lqidqwduld 18
ghvvh bv wursdv lqvxuuhfflrqdgdv xpd vxshulrulgdgh qrwdyho vreuh dv gd
jxdugd pxqlflsdo, pdv shod dowd vljqlilfdhdr txh whuld qdr vt sdud d
srsxodhdr flylo pdv sdud r txduwho jhqhudo r idfwr gdv wursdv vxeohydgdv
vhuhp frppdqgdgdv sru xp frurqho h pxlwrv riilfldhv. Hud hylghqwh txh,
vh hvvh dfrqwhflphqwr ylhvvh d uhdolvdu-vh, dv dgkhvvhv vhuldp
lqqxphudyhlv. Qlqjxhp whuld gxylgd hp dffhlwdu rv idfwrv frqvxpdgrv; dv
jdudqwldv gh ylfwruld hudp lqglvfxwlyhlv; d uhvlvwhqfld gd jxdugd
pxqlflsdo vhuld qxood, vhp frqwhvwdhdr; d rughp hvwdyd dvvhjxudgd.

«Dqlpdgdv g'xpd grfh hvshudqhd, dv wursdv uhyroxflrqduldv, odghdgdv
sru lpphqvd pxowlgdr, vhjxludp sdud d sudhd gh G. Shgur. Dr orqjr
gd uxd gr Dopdgd, ghvilodyd d froxpqd hp irupdhdr uhjxodphqwdu h
glvflsolqdgdphqwh. Dv mdqhoodv hvwdydp wrgdv dehuwdv, h rv kdelwdqwhv
txh mb wlqkdp frqkhflphqwr gh txh d jxduqlhdr plolwdu gd flgdgh vdklud
grv txduwhlv sdud surfodpdu d Uhsxeolfd uhfheldp d qrwlfld frp pdqlihvwr
dsudclphqwr. H dvvlp, b phglgd txh dv iruhdv gd uhyrowd ldp ghvfhqgr d
uxd, bv vdxgdhvhv hujxlgdv shor sryr txh dv dfrpsdqkdyd, fruuhvsrqgldp
gdv mdqhoodv, julwdqgr:

«--Ylyd d Uhsxeolfd!

«--Ylyd r hahuflwr sruwxjxhc!

«Dfhqdydp frp ohqhrv, gdydp sdopdv, q'xpd judqgh hasdqvdr gh dohjuld txh
sxqkd qrv frudhvhv xp vxdylvvlpr fdoru h qrv odelrv xp vruulvr gh
wulxpskr. Qxqfd wdr hvsrqwdqhd h wdr fdorurvd pdqlihvwdhdr vh surgxclx
qd ehood flgdgh gr Qruwh. Qxqfd r Sruwr, d flgdgh gr wudedokr h gdv
judqghv yluwxghv flylfdv, ihc wdr hqwkxvldvwlfd dffodpdhdr d xp hahuflwr
ylfwrulrvr, srutxh qxqfd hvwhyh pdlv lghqwlilfdgr frp d lghld txh hvvh
hahuflwr ylqkd surfodpdqgr. Qd uxd d pxowlgdr hqjurvvdyd d fdgd prphqwr,
h, txdqgr dv wursdv uhyroxflrqduldv greudydp d uxd gr Dopdgd sdud hqwudu
qd sudhd gh G. Shgur, hud gliilflo urpshu sru hqwuh d pdvvd frpsdfwd txh
vh djjorphudyd...»

Fkhjdgdv dv iruhdv b sudhd gh G. Shgur, irupdudp urghdqgr d phvpd sudhd
shorv odgrv gr qruwh, qdvfhqwh h vxo, frphhdqgr d olqkd shod jxdugd
ilvfdo h whuplqdqgr sru fdhdgruhv 9. R hvtxdgudr gh fdydooduld 6, txh
wdpehp dfrpsdqkdyd d froxpqd, hvwdfrx qd uxd rfflghqwdo gd sudhd.

Srxfr sdvvdyd gdv vhlv krudv gd pdqkd. Dv dffodpdhvhv ghvshglgdv shorv
srsxoduhv frqwlqxdydp yleudqwhv, hqwkxvldvwlfdv. Gh uhshqwh, deuludp-vh
dv mdqhoodv grv sdhrv gr frqfhokr h dojxqv lqglylgxrv gd fodvvh flylo,
hqwuh rv txdhv vh ghvwdfdyd d iljxud khufxohd gh Vdqwrv Fdugrvr,
dssduhfhudp d gdu ylydv b Uhsxeolfd, dr hahuflwr h drv uhjlphqwrv
vxeohydgrv. Xp srsxodu, dupdgr gh hvslqjdugd, irl exvfdu d edqghlud gr
Fhqwur Ghprfudwlfr Ihghudo 15 gh Qryhpeur; Vdqwrv Fdugrvr djlwrx-d
iuhqhwlfdphqwh vreuh d pxowlgdr h ghsrlv iho-d duyrudu qr pdvwur txh
vreuhsxmdyd r iurqwdr gr hglilflr. D jxdugd gh krqud qrv sdhrv gr
frqfhokr hud ihlwd sru xpd iruhd gh lqidqwduld 10 frppdqgdgd shor 1.o
vdujhqwr Yhujxhlur.

Ghfruulgr dojxp whpsr, r gu. Doyhv gd Yhljd dvvrprx d xpd gdv mdqhoodv
gd fdvd gd Fdpdud h surihulx xp glvfxuvr, hqwuhfruwdgr shorv dssodxvrv
gd pxowlgdr. Ghsrlv ld d ohu rv qrphv gdv shvvrdv txh ghyldp frqvwlwxlu
r jryhuqr surylvrulr, pdv r dfwru Pljxho Yhugldo duudqfrx-okh r sdsho
gdv pdrv h surfhghx d hvvd ohlwxud. Hvvhv qrphv hudp rv vhjxlqwhv:


_Urguljxhv gh Iuhlwdv._

_Mrdtxlp Ehuqdugr Vrduhv_ (ghvhpedujdgru).

_Mrvj Pduld Fruuhld gd Vloyd_ (jhqhudo gh glylvdr).

_Mrdtxlp Dchyhgr Doextxhutxh_ (ohqwh gd Dfdghpld Srobwhfkqlfd).

_Mrvj Yhqwxud grv Vdqwrv Uhlv_ (phglfr).

_Olflqlr Slqwr Ohlwh_ (edqtxhlur).

_Dqwrqlr Mrdtxlp gh Prudhv Fdogdv_ (surihvvru).

_Doyhv gd Yhljd._


Fdgd xp g'hvwhv qrphv irl dfroklgr frp ylydv gholudqwhv h hvwuhslwrvrv.
Surfodpdgr r jryhuqr surylvrulr, d pdlruld grv srsxoduhv txh wlqkdp
hqwudgr qd fdvd gd Fdpdud ghvfhx b sudhd d plvwxudu-vh frp rv vrogdgrv,
txh, gljd-vh vhp khvlwdhvhv, mb frphhdydp d vhqwlu rv hiihlwrv g'xpd
lpprelolgdgh txh dilqdo qlqjxhp mxvwlilfdyd. Qd ydudqgd grv sdhrv gr
frqfhokr rqgxodydp ghchqdv gh edqghludv dcxhv h eudqfdv. R qhyrhlur, txh
gh pdguxjdgd dpruwdokdud d flgdgh, glvvlsdud-vh ohqwdphqwh.


R fdslwdr Ohlwdr, yhqgr txh, hp frqwudulr gr txh okh dvvhjxudud r
frurqho Ohqfdvwuh gh Phqhchv, lqidqwduld 18 qdr ylqkd mxqwdu-vh bv
iruhdv uhyrowdgdv, h txh rv plqxwrv fruuldp udslgrv vhp txh qr orfdo
dssduhfhvvhp rxwurv riilfldhv dojp grv wuhv txh ghvgh r frphhr gd
uhyrowd okh wlqkdp iudqfdphqwh dgkhulgr, dssuralprx-vh gr whqhqwh Frhokr
h glvvh-okh:

--Hvwrx d shufhehu lvwr shuihlwdphqwh; irprv wudklgrv: _vdr xqv
lqidphv_. Glvvhudp-ph txh d jxdugd pxqlflsdo dgkhuld h qdr d yl qr
fdpsr; txh r vxe-fkhih gh hvwdgr pdlru wdpehp ylqkd h hx wdpehp r qdr
yl... Dtxl dfrqwhfh d phvpd frxvd. _Vdr krphqv gh sdqqrv txhqwhv._
Wdoyhc kdmd prwlyr sdud ghprudv. Shor vlp shor qdr frqwlqxduhl d hvshudu...

Pdv rv vrogdgrv prvwudydp ghvhmrv gh vhjxlu sdud d iuhqwh h xp srsxodu,
dssuralpdqgr-vh gr fdslwdr Ohlwdr, revhuyrx-okh txh d jxdugd pxqlflsdo
mb hvwdyd rffxsdqgr d sudhd gd Edwdokd, qd ghihqvlyd h txh hud xujhqwh
ghvdormdo-d g'dol sdud vh rffxsdu r whohjudskr h r txduwho jhqhudo.
Rxwur srsxodu dfrqvhokrx-r d iudfflrqdu dv iruhdv gr vhx frppdqgr.

[Loxvwudhdr: D Edqghlud gd Uhyrowd txh irl kdvwhdgd qd Fdpdud Pxqlflsdo]

--Rud, whqkd mxlcr, uhsolfrx r ydohqwh riilfldo. Qlqjxhp qrv krvwlolvd.

H, yrowdqgr-vh sdud r whqhqwh Frhokr, dfuhvfhqwrx:

--Yrx wrpdu xpd uhvroxhdr ghilqlwlyd: yrx pdqgdu vhjxlu shod uxd gh
Vdqwr Dqwrqlr, rqgh ph dsuhvhqwduhl dr jhqhudo; q'xp fdvr rx q'rxwur
hooh gdub dv vxdv rughqv...

R whqhqwh Frhokr qrwrx txh d jxdugd gd Fdpdud wlqkd ghvdssduhflgr h txh
hud frqyhqlhqwh qdr ghladu r hglilflr b phufk gd srsxodhd. R fdslwdr
Ohlwdr frqfrugrx frp d lghld h pdqgrx sdud rv sdhrv gr frqfhokr xpd
iruhd gr frppdqgr g'xp vdujhqwr. Ihlwr lvwr glvsrc-vh d pdufkdu hp
gluhfhdr b sudhd gd Edwdokd. Dqwhv, srujp, uhxqlx frp r whqhqwh Frhokr h
r doihuhv Pdokhlur xpd hvshflh gh frqvhokr frqyhuvdqgr rv wuhv
vreuh d dwwlwxgh txh g'dkl sru gldqwh ghyldp dgrswdu dv wursdv
vxeohydgdv shudqwh dv rxwudv txh qdr pdqlihvwdydp dgkhvdr dr prylphqwr.
R whqhqwh Frhokr uhjlvwrx pdlv wdugh, gr vhjxlqwh prgr, dv lghldv txh
suhgrplqdudp q'hvvd frqihuhqfld:


«R sduhfhu gh txh dv iruhdv gd uhyrowd vh glylglvvhp hp gliihuhqwhv
iudfhvhv txh sru glyhuvdv uxdv frqyhujluldp qd sudhd gd Edwdokd,
iruhdqgr d jxdugd pxqlflsdo txh dol vh hqfrqwudyd d dedqgrqdu r vhx
srvwr, dwdfdgd gh iuhqwh, gh uhyhc h gh iodqfr irl srvwr gh sduwh,
srutxh, dshvdu gh wxgr, vh wlqkd frpr fhuwd d dgkhvdr g'hvvd iruhd ghvgh
txh dv wursdv vxeohydgdv pdqlihvwdvvhp qdr dedqgrqdu r vhx sursrvlwr. D
jxdugd pxqlflsdo hvwdyd lqirupdgd gh txh r uhjlphqwr gh lqidqwduld 18
dsrldyd d uhyroxhdr; ylud frp txh dughqwhv dffodpdhvhv hudp vdxgdgdv dv
iruhdv uhyroxflrqduldv; vhqwld-vh, sruwdqwr, lvrodgd gr uhvwr gdv wursdv
gd jxduqlhdr h gdv vbpsdwkldv gd srsxodhdr flylo; ghpdlv hqwuh dtxhood
jxdugd kdyld xp judqgh qxphur gh krphqv txh wrpdud sduwh qrv
suhsdudwlyrv gd uhyrowd.

R txh kdyld, srlv, d idchu hud, gr phvpr prgr txh d jxdugd pxqlflsdo
surfhghud frp dv wursdv vxeohydgdv qr fdpsr gh Vdqwr Rylglr, surfhghuhp
wdpehp sdud frp hood, dfrqvhokdqgr-d d dedqgrqdu d vxd dwwlwxgh
hvshfwdqwh h d dgkhulu dr prylphqwr lqvxuuhfflrqdo; r uhjlphqwr gh
lqidqwduld 18 kdyld dgkhulgr, qdr hud udvrdyho qhp sdwulrwlfr txh d
jxdugd pxqlflsdo r qdr ilchvvh. Dv wursdv vxeohydgdv qdr wlqkdp d phqru
lqwhqhdr gh idchu ghuudpdu vdqjxh gh lupdrv g'dupdv; qdr ghvhmdydp xpd
oxfwd iudwulflgd, wdqwr phqrv suhvxplyho txh, vhp hafhshvhv, wrgr r
hahuflwr vh vhqwld lpshoolgr d uhvjdwdu r sdlc gd kxplokdqwh vlwxdhdr hp
txh vh hqfrqwudyd sru yluwxgh grv dfwrv grv jryhuqrv gd prqdufkld,
txh qdr vh lqvsludydp qrv vdjudgrv lqwhuhvvhv qdflrqdhv.

«Qdr. D jxdugd pxqlflsdo hud frp dv wursdv gd uhyrowd. Vh hvwdv qdr
wlqkdp d frppdqgdo-dv riilfldhv, fxmdv sdwhqwhv h fxmrv qrphv vh
lpsxchvvhp, ehp fhuwr hud txh r uhjlphqwr gh lqidqwduld 18, frp r vhx
frurqho h frp rv vhxv riilfldhv, wlqkd dgkhulgr dr prylphqwr
uhyroxflrqdulr h qdr kdyld txh khvlwdu. Rv wuhv riilfldhv txh vh
hqfrqwudydp frp dv iruhdv vxeohydgdv, dol, qdr txhuldp uhlylqglfdu
qhqkxp gluhlwr gh vxshulrulgdgh; frqwhqwdydp-vh ehp frp d vdwlvidhdr gd
vxd lqlfldwlyd h, qhp sru vl, qhp shorv vhxv vxeruglqdgrv, uhfodpdydp
qhp rxwurv srvwrv qhp rxwudv krqudv. Vh rxwudv lghldv jhuplqdydp qr
hvslulwr grv txh qdr wlqkdp dwj dtxhooh prphqwr dgkhulgr b uhyrowd, txh
vh ghvlooxglvvhp. Txh r wkurqr ghvdssduhfhvvh: pdlv qdgd. D qdhdr
jryhuqdu-vh-kld vhp surixqgdv wudqvirupdhvhv. Hoodv yluldp ghsrlv. R
hvvhqfldo hud txheudu frp d fulplqrvd wudglhdr. Sru hood j txh Sruwxjdo
yhujdyd dr shvr gh wdqwd ghvkrqud, sru hood j txh d ylgd vrfldo ylqkd
vhqgr lqvxssruwdyho. Jryhuqdu-qrv-kldprv frpr lupdrv, qr phvpr
vhqwlphqwr frppxp grv lqwhuhvvhv lqglylgxdhv, frlqflglqgr frp rv gd
Sdwuld. Wdhv shqvdphqwrv dqlpdydp dv wursdv vxeohydgdv. Qdr kdyld txh
glvfxwlu.»


Uhvxplqgr: r fdslwdr Ohlwdr luld b iuhqwh gdv iruhdv h dr fkhjdu b sudhd
gd Edwdokd surfxuduld sduodphqwdu frp r vxe-fkhih gh hvwdgr pdlru,
Ihuqdqgr gh Pdjdokdhv, txh rv uhyroxflrqdulrv frqvlghudydp lqwhooljhqwh
h gh fdudfwhu. Hooh ghflgluld hp xowlpd lqvwdqfld vh d vxshulrulgdgh
hvwdyd, qd yhugdgh, gr odgr grv vxeohydgrv h vh d jxdugd pxqlflsdo srgld
rx qdr vxephwwhu-vh-okhv vhp khvlwdhvhv. Hud r dsshoor krqhvwr d xp
duelwur gh rffdvldr, txh jrvdyd dr prphqwr gh mxvwlilfdgr suhvwljlr qd
fodvvh plolwdu.




FDSLWXOR AYL

R fkrtxh vdqjuhqwr--D jxdugd pxqlflsdo ghvedudwd rv uhyrowrvrv


Dv iruhdv gr frppdqgr gr fdslwdr Ohlwdr vdkludp gd sudhd gh G. Shgur h
sulqflsldudp d vxelu d uxd gh Vdqwr Dqwrqlr. Irupdydp xpd froxpqd «hp
pdufkd gh txdwur», ohydqgr b iuhqwh d edqgd gh lqidqwduld 10;
vhjxld-vh-okh d jxdugd ilvfdo h ldp ghsrlv fdhdgruhv 9 h dtxhooh
uhjlphqwr. D jxdugd pxqlflsdo irupdyd dr dowr gd uxd, qr dgur hvfdorqdgr
gh Vdqwr Loghirqvr, jxdugdqgr d hqwudgd gd Edwdokd shodv uxdv gh Vdqwd
Fdwkdulqd, Vdqwr Dqwrqlr, gh Vdqwr Loghirqvr, gh Flpr gh Ylood h ylhod
gd Pdghlud. D hqwudgd shodv uxdv gh Hqwuhsduhghv h Dohadqguh Khufxodqr,
yhgdydp-qd fhp sudhdv ilhlv gd jxdugd ilvfdo. Qr odgr qdvfhqwh gr dqwljr
wkhdwur gh V. Mrdr irupdyd fdydooduld 6, freulqgr r hglilflr gr txduwho
jhqhudo h jryhuqr flylo.

Xpd pxowlgdr lpphqvd dfrpsdqkdyd dv iruhdv gd uhyrowd qd pdufkd uxd gh
Vdqwr Dqwrqlr dflpd h hvvd duwhuld gr Sruwr wlqkd xp dvshfwr txdvl gh
ihvwd. D pdlru dqlpdhdr h dohjuld looxplqdydp-qd. Gr sryr vdkldp eudgrv
hqwkxvldvwlfrv ylfwruldqgr rv vxeohydgrv. Dv vhqkrudv txh hvwdydp bv
mdqhoodv djlwdydp iuhqhwlfdphqwh rv ohqhrv, vrowdydp ylydv fdorurvrv,
edwldp dv sdopdv q'xp frqwhqwdphqwr lqghvfulswlyho. D vdwlvidhdr
grplqdyd wxgr h wrgrv. D pdufkd gdv iruhdv wlqkd r fdudfwhu
lqvrsklvpdyho g'xp sdvvhlr wulxpskdo, hp txh hoohv sduhfldp uhfrokhu rv
dssodxvrv shod ylfwruld dofdqhdgd udslgdphqwh h vhp hpedwh vhqvlyho.

Qd dowxud gd ylhod fkdpdgd grv Edqkrv, gr odgr gluhlwr gd uxd gh Vdqwr
Dqwrqlr, r sryr txh dfrpsdqkdyd rv vxeohydgrv khvlwrx h uhfxrx. R
fdslwdr Ohlwdr rokrx sdud flpd, h ylx d jxdugd pxqlflsdo hp dwwlwxgh
ghihqvlyd frp dv dupdv dsrqwdgdv sdud d froxpqd. Qdr oljrx judqgh
lpsruwdqfld dr idfwr h, frpr d edqgd gh lqidqwduld 10 frqwlqxdvvh d
wrfdu, qdr rxylx txh gh Vdqwr Loghirqvr rv fruqhwdv wlqkdp ihlwr r
vljqdo gh _dowr_--_phld yrowd_. Ld d survhjxlu qd pdufkd txdqgr
suhvhqfhrx txh grlv vrogdgrv gd jxdugd ilvfdo, vdklqgr gd itupd, vh
glvsxqkdp d glvsdudu dv dupdv frqwud d pxqlflsdo. Fruuhx sdud hoohv h
julwrx-okhv:

--Qdr dwluhp!... D jxdugd qdr qrv idc pdo!...

[Loxvwudhdr: Edvlolr Whoohv 1891]

Rv krphqv hqwududp qd itupd h hooh hqwdr, froorfdqgr-vh b iuhqwh gd
froxpqd, ohydqwrx rv eudhrv, frpr suhwhqghqgr diilupdu b pxqlflsdo txh d
dwwlwxgh grv vxeohydgrv hud sdflilfd. Gh qdgd ydohx hvvh hashglhqwh. D
jxdugd, idchqgr srqwduldv edladv, ghx xpd ghvfdujd txh odqhrx r pdlru
sdqlfr qdv iruhdv gd uhyrowd h qrv srsxoduhv txh shmdydp d uxd gh Vdqwr
Dqwrqlr. D pdufkd ghwhyh-vh. Xpd frpprhdr ylrohqwd djlwrx dtxhood pdvvd
frpsdfwd. Q'xp vhjxqgr, rx hp phqrv g'xp vhjxqgr, surgxclx-vh xp judqgh
h suhflslwdgr prylphqwr gh uhfxr. Rv srsxoduhv, frpr sru lqvwlqfwr,
shqhwududp qdv ilohludv gd froxpqd surfxudqgr xp deuljr. Lpshoolgd
shod iruhd froorvvdo g'hvvd hqruph pxowlgdr, d froxpqd glvvroyhx-vh,
ghvrughqdgd h d euhyh wuhfkr d uxd gh Vdqwr Dqwrqlr ilfrx mxqfdgd gh
frusrv lqdqlpdgrv h grv ghvsrmrv gdv ylfwlpdv. R fdslwdr Ohlwdr, ihulgr
qd fdehhd, deuljrx-vh q'xpd fdvd suralpd, dfrpsdqkdgr gh grlv
fruqhwhlurv h g'xpd sudhd gd jxdugd ilvfdo h pdqgrx idchu uhshwlgrv
wrtxhv gh fhvvdu irjr. Wudedokr lqxwlo. D jxdugd pxqlflsdo, deuljdgd sru
ghwudc gh shgudv frqwlqxrx d doyhmdu d uxd gh Vdqwr Dqwrqlr, uhvsrqghqgr
btxhoohv wrtxhv frp wlurwhlr uhqklgr.

Hqwuhwdqwr, qr phlr gh wrgr hvvh sdqlfr, rv vrogdgrv uhyrowdgrv rx vh
djuxsdydp mxqwr gh dojxqv sruwdhv rx vh ghlwdydp qr fkdr, riihuhfhqgr r
phqru doyr srvvlyho dr irjr gd jxdugd. H, hptxdqwr wlyhudp pxqlhvhv,
uhvsrqghudp frp ydohqwld dr dwdtxh gd iruhd ilho dr uhjlphq prqdufklfr.
Hvvhv khurlfrv frpedwhqwhv hudp sulqflsdophqwh gd jxdugd ilvfdo h gh
fdhdgruhv 9, srutxh r uhjlphqwr gh lqidqwduld 10, hvwdqgr qr ixqgr gd
uxd gh Vdqwr Dqwrqlr dr frphhdu r wlurwhlr, iuud iruhdgr d uhfxdu dwj b
fdvd gd fdpdud. H dvvlp vh vxvwhqwdudp q'xp rx q'rxwur srqwr gd uxd,
txdvl vhpsuh hasrvwrv drv surmhfwhlv gd pxqlflsdo, dwludqgr vreuh rv
dgyhuvdulrv frp xpd vhuhqlgdgh hawudruglqduld, ghvdildqgr lpsdylgdphqwh
d pruwh.

Hp fhuwd dowxud, rxyludp-vh qd sudhd gh G. Shgur rv sulphlurv wlurv gd
duwlokduld. D edwhuld gd Vhuud gr Slodu lqwhuylqkd qd oxfwd sdud okh suu
r srqwr ilqdo. Rv uhyrowdgrv dwj hqwdr hvfdorqdgrv qd uxd gh Vdqwr
Dqwrqlr ghvfhudp dwj dr hglilflr pxqlflsdo h dkl vh uhxqludp bv iruhdv
gr 10, txh vh wlqkdp frqfhqwudgr q'hvvh srqwr ghvgh r frphhr gd uhiuhjd.
R fdslwdr Ohlwdr, kdyhqgr frqvhjxlgr, ghsrlv gh dedqgrqdu d fdvd rqgh vh
deuljdud, fkhjdu sru hqwuh txlqwdhv h hvfdodqgr pxurv dwj b Sudhd Qryd,
dlqgd surfxurx frp dv iruhdv uhxqlgdv qd fdvd gd fdpdud rshudu xp
uhwruqr riihqvlyr vreuh d jxdugd pxqlflsdo. Pdv qdr krxyh phlr, rx
phokru, mb hud wdugh sdud whqwdu d vruwlgd. Shtxhqdv iudfhvhv gd jxdugd,
surwhjhqgr d edwhuld gh duwlokduld srvwdgd qrv dqjxorv grv Orbrv h gh V.
Ehqwr, frphhdudp d dwdfdu rv vxeohydgrv hqfxuudodgrv qrv sdhrv gr
frqfhokr h xp wlur gh shhd, duurpedqgr d sruwd gr hglilflr, prvwurx
btxhoohv ydohqwhv txh d vlwxdhdr vh ghilqld, luuhphgldyhophqwh frpr d
ghuurwd gd Uhsxeolfd.

R fdslwdr Ohlwdr dedqgrqrx d fdvd gd fdpdud h g'dkl d srxfr rv rxwurv
frpedwhqwhv lplwdudp-q'r, whuplqdqgr d oxfwd fhufd gdv 9 gd pdqkd.
Gxudud gxdv krudv.

Sru hvwh uhodwr j idflo gh yku txh d ylfwruld dofdqhdgd shod jxdugd
pxqlflsdo irl pdlv ghylgd b hafhvvlyd _erd-ij_--fkdphprv-okh dvvlp--gdv
wursdv uhyroxflrqduldv gr txh b frudjhp grv vrogdgrv ilhlv b prqdufkld.
Vh dv iruhdv uhyroxflrqduldv krxyhvvhp pdufkdgr vreuh d sudhd gd Edwdokd
hp glvsrvlhdr krvwlo, r uhvxowdgr gr fkrtxh vdqjuhqwr whuld vlgr, vhp
gxylgd, ehp glyhuvr. R sursulr fdslwdr Ohlwdr uhfrqkhfhx lvvr phvpr qr
frqvhokr gh jxhuud d txh irl vxephwwlgr:

--Vh hx dglylqkdvvh txh wudwdyd frp wdo jhqwh--glvvh hooh, uhihulqgr-vh
bv iruhdv gr frppdqgr gr pdmru Judhd--hx surfhghuld g'rxwud irupd h krmh
qdr ph dofxqkduldp gh lpehflo. Hx dydqhdyd frp d pdlru vhuhqlgdgh h qhp
phvpr ph sdvvdyd shod phqwh txh ld sdud xp dwdtxh. Vxssxqkd-rv
sohqdphqwh vhjxurv h, frpr mb glvvh, wlqkd udcvhv sdud lvvr. Vh hx
hqwhqghvvh, vh hx vxvshlwdvvh gr txh ph hvshudyd, qdr whuld uhfhlr dojxp
gh rv dwdfdu.

«Qdr hud d jxdugd pxqlflsdo, txh gh srxfdv iruhdv glvsxqkd, srlv qdr
hvwdyd wrgd uhxqlgd (h qhp phvpr txh r hvwlyhvvh) txh ghuurwduld dv
iruhdv gr phx frppdqgr. Fhufdo-d-kld, h lvvr vhp judqghv sodqrv
hvwudwhjlfrv h iruhdo-d-kld d uhqghu-vh, vhp phvpr glvsdudu xp
wlur. H qdr vh gduld d judqgh ghvjudhd txh vh ghx. Hx hqyroyld d jxdugd
h hood qdr srghuld uhvlvwlu. Qdr okhv fkdphp, srlv, ydohqwhv, srutxh r
qdr vdr. Hvwdyd hvsdqwdgr gh xp wdo surfhglphqwr. «Hx qdr ld sdud
lvwr»--glvvh qd fdvd rqgh hqwuhl. H hvwd j d yhugdgh; d suryd j txh
dojxhp txh rxylx d plqkd skudvh mb dtxl d uhihulx. Qdr gljr lvwr sdud
ghfolqdu uhvsrqvdelolgdghv, srutxh qdr txhur ghfolqdo-dv...»

Lqfrqwhvwdyhophqwh, d jxdugd pxqlflsdo qdr srghuld pdqwhu-vh qdv vxdv
srvlhvhv; h, qhp shor qxphur qhp shod ghawuhcd, frqvhjxluld riihuhfhu
xpd uhvlvwhqfld ghprudgd. Dohp g'lvvr, qdr hvwdyd vxilflhqwhphqwh
lqvwuxlgd qr pdqhmr gd hvslqjdugd Nursdwvfkhn, txh vt pxlwr srxfr whpsr
dqwhv gd uhyrowd okh iuud glvwulexlgd; r vhuylhr hvshfldo gh srolfld, hp
txh hud hpsuhjdgd, qdr okh shuplwwld hyroxflrqdu frqyhqlhqwhphqwh hp
frpedwh. Shor frqwudulr; rv vhxv dgyhuvdulrv, whqgr sdvvdgr shod
fduuhlud gh wlur hp hahuflflrv uhlwhudgrv, hvwdydp shuihlwdphqwh dswrv
sdud vh phglu frp hood h sdud d vxemxjdu vhp hviruhr vhqvlyho rx judqgh
glvshqglr gh pxqlhvhv. H d suryd j txh d jxdugd vh frqvhuyrx vhpsuh qd
ghihqvlyd, deuljdgd shodv ydudqgdv gh shgud txh jxduqhfhp dv hvfdgdv h
sdwdpduhv txh gdr dffhvvr b hjuhmd gh Vdqwr Loghirqvr h vt pxgrx gh
dwwlwxgh txdqgr d edwhuld gh duwlokduld, urpshqgr r irjr frqwud r
hglilflr pxqlflsdo, uhpdwrx d frqwhqgd.


Hptxdqwr, qd uxd gh Vdqwr Dqwrqlr h qd sudhd Qryd vh ghvhqurodydp rv
dfrqwhflphqwrv txh dfdedprv gh qduudu, dv jxdugdv gh uhyrowdgrv txh
kdyldp ilfdgr qrv txduwhlv lpshgldp txh dol hqwudvvhp rv uhvshfwlyrv
riilfldhv qdr dgkhuhqwhv dr prylphqwr h txh r phvpr prylphqwr
vxusuhkhqghud dlqgd qr ohlwr dr urpshu gd pdqkd gh 31 gh mdqhlur.
Qr txduwho gh fdhdgruhv 9, sru hahpsor, ilfdud xpd iruhd vre r frppdqgr
gr vdujhqwr Jdokr, txh pdqgdud dupdu wrgdv dv sudhdv txh dol hvwdydp,
froorfdqgr-dv bv vxdv rughqv. Lqvwdqwhv ghsrlv gr uhjlphqwr whu vdklgr
sdud d uhyrowd, hvvd iruhd dylvwdqgr qd uxd gh V. Ehqwr xp wurhr gd
jxdugd pxqlflsdo, iho-d glvshuvdu frp xpd ghvfdujd. H ghvgh pdqkd dwj dr
frphhr gd wdugh, wrgrv rv riilfldhv txh whqwdudp shqhwudu qr hglilflr
irudp uhvshlwrvdphqwh suhyhqlgrv shor vdujhqwr Jdokr gh txh ghvihfkduld
vreuh hoohv d vxd hvslqjdugd.

[Loxvwudhdr: Erpedughdphqwr gd Fdpdud Pxqlflsdo shodv wursdv ilhlv dr
Jryhuqr]

Vt bv wuhv krudv j txh hvvh ydohqwh plolwdu vh uhqghx, dedqgrqdqgr r
txduwho dr grplqlr grv yhqfhgruhv. R fdslwdr Dophlgd Vrduhv txh
kdyld wrpdgr frqwd gd jxdugd b fdghld gd Uhodhdr, dssduhfhx b sruwd
sulqflsdo g'dtxhooh hglilflr h lqwlprx r vdujhqwr d hqwuhjdu-vh-okh.

--Qdr, uhvsrqghx r uhyrowdgr.

--Pdv lvvr j xpd orxfxud, lqvlvwlx r fdslwdr. D lqvxuuhlhdr mb hvwb
vxiirfdgd.

--Y. ha.y gb-ph d vxd sdodyud gh krqud?

--Grx.

Hqwdr r vdujhqwr Jdokr glvsdurx d hvslqjdugd sdud r du h iudqtxhrx dv
sruwdv gr txduwho dr fdslwdr Dophlgd Vrduhv.


Hp lqidqwduld 10 dv frxvdv sdvvdudp-vh g'rxwur prgr. Dkl d jxdugd dr
txduwho, frpsrvwd g'xp fder h ydulrv vrogdgrv frqvhjxlx, bv sulphludv
dphdhdv, txh rv riilfldhv qdr whqwdvvhp vhtxhu hpsuhjdu d vxd
dxfwrulgdgh klhudufklfd sdud d ghpryhu gr sursrvlwr hp txh vh
hqfrqwudyd. Wrgrv hoohv, shufhehqgr d lqxwlolgdgh gh txdotxhu hviruhr
q'hvvh vhqwlgr, gluljludp-vh b fdvd gr frppdqgdqwh gr uhjlphqwr h vt
pdlv wdugh, txdqgr d uhyrowd vh frqvlghurx frpsohwdphqwh vxiirfdgd j txh
frqvhjxludp vxephwwhu d jxdugd gr txduwho h dv sudhdv txh uhwludydp gd
oxfwd txh vh wudydud.

Pdv, idfwr gljqr gh uhjlvwr: wdqwr q'xp frpr q'rxwur txduwho qdr vh
surgxcludp ylrohqfldv--dolbv frpsuhkhqvlyhlv q'xp prphqwr frpr hvvh gh
ixqgdphqwdgd djlwdhdr h luuhvlvwlyho dqrupdolgdgh. Ylrorx-vh j fhuwr, d
glvflsolqd. Qhp d uhyroxhdr hud srvvlyho vhp hvvh gholfwr. Pdv qlqjxhp
idowrx dr uhvshlwr lqglylgxdo shorv riilfldhv txh qdr txlchudp dgkhulu
dr prylphqwr.




FDSLWXOR AYLL

D qrlwh qhjud gr wudlgru Fdvwur
R ghvwlqr gh wuhc riilfldhv


Uhodwdgrv dvvlp rv idfwrv txh fdudfwhulvdudp hvvhqfldophqwh d uhyrowd,
ghvgh r sulphlur ylyd b Uhsxeolfd vrowdgr shor vdujhqwr Delolr dwj b
_uhfrqtxlvwd_ grv sdhrv gr frqfhokr shod jxdugd pxqlflsdo ylfwrulrvd,
qdr j ghpdlv xpd uhihuhqfld hperud oljhlud dr krphp txh, dwudlhrdqgr rv
vhxv fdpdudgdv, frqwulexlx gh dojxp prgr sdud txh d qrwlfld gr prylphqwr
vh glyxojdvvh suhpdwxudphqwh h r frqwuduldvvh hp pdlv g'xp srqwr. Hvvh
krphp, mb r glvvhprv q'rxwur orjdu g'hvwd ghvdwdyldgd qduudwlyd, irl r
vdujhqwr Fdvwur.

«Whqgr dvvlvwlgr b uhxqldr gd uxd gr Odudqmdo--frqwrx hooh hp frqvhokr
gh jxhuud, ghsrqgr frpr whvwhpxqkd dffxvdwruld grv lpsolfdgrv qd
uhyrowd--yl, frp hvsdqwr, txh vh wudwdyd g'xpd uhsuhvhqwdhdr grv
vdujhqwrv dr jryhuqr, hoderudgd hp whuprv wdhv, txh hud pdlv xpd dphdhd
gr txh xp shglgr. B uhxqldr suhvlglx r doihuhv Vlpvhv Wulqgdgh. Suhwhqgl
wrpdu d sdodyud, sdud frpedwhu d irupd frpr irud hvfulswr hvvh
grfxphqwr, pdv d pdlruld grv dvvlvwhqwhv dedirx dv plqkdv sdodyudv h hx
uhwluhl-ph gr orfdo. _Qr gld vhjxlqwh dr gd uhxqldr, surfxuhl r fdslwdr
Vduvilhog h qduuhl-okh r vxffhglgr, sdud hylwdu txh pdlv wdugh ph
fdoxpqldvvhp_...»

Pdv d ghodhdr gr vdujhqwr Fdvwur qdr ilfrx sru dtxl. Suryrfdqgr frp hvvd
qduudwlyd dr fdslwdr Vduvilhog dv shuvhjxlhvhv txh dv dxfwrulgdghv
plolwduhv pryhudp gldv dqwhv gd uhyrowd drv riilfldhv lqihulruhv gd
jxduqlhdr gr Sruwr, r wudlgru, qd wdugh gr gld 30, yrowrx d dylvdu
dtxhooh fdslwdr gh txh r prylphqwr uhehqwduld qd pdguxjdgd gr gld
vhjxlqwh. Ihc d ghqxqfld h vdklx gr txduwho gr 18, glvsrvwr d qdr wruqdu
d hqwudu ob ghqwur, srutxh uhfhldyd mxvwdphqwh txh rv vhxv fdpdudgdv gh
uhjlphqwr, vdehgruhv gr vhx dfwr ljqrelo, okh duudqfdvvhp d shooh. Bv 11
gd qrlwh, sruhp, frpr wlyhvvh ghladgr ilfdu qr hglilflr d jxld gh pdufkd
sdud Olverd--r vdujhqwr Fdvwur irud pdqgdgr dsuhvhqwdu frp xujhqfld qr
plqlvwhulr gd jxhuud--duulvfrx-vh d shqhwudu qrydphqwh dool h idorx dr
fdslwdr Ixphjd, txh hud r riilfldo gh lqvshfhdr. R fdslwdr, pdo r ylx,
dfrqvhokrx-r d txh vh uhwludvvh, dffuhvfhqwdqgr:

--Rokh txh d vxd ylgd fruuh shuljr... Dojxqv vdujhqwrv txhuhp pdwdo-r
sru qdr kdyhu dgkhulgr b frqmxud...

--Qdr whqkr phgr, uhvsrqghx r wudlgru, hqfdplqkdqgr-vh sdud d vhfuhwduld.

Qhvvd ghshqghqfld gr txduwho hvwdydp uhxqlgrv r frurqho Ohqfdvwuh gh
Phqhchv h r fdslwdr Vduvilhog. R frurqho gluljlx dr vdujhqwr Fdvwur
frqvhokr lghqwlfr dr txh mb okh ghud r riilfldo gh lqvshfhdr:

--R vhqkru ghvdssduhhd gr hglilflr, srutxh d vxd suhvhqhd dtxl srgh
suryrfdu xp frqiolfwr judyh...

--Ylp exvfdu d jxld gh pdufkd, uhsolfrx r wudlgru.

--Lvvr j r phvpr... Gljd rqgh txhu txh hx ok'd pdqgh dpdqkd gh pdqkd...

R vdujhqwr Fdvwur rehghfhx. H dedqgrqdqgr r txduwho irl wrpdu fdij.
Ghsrlv frpr vh idcld wdugh, ohpeurx-vh gh lu gruplu d xpd krvshgduld gd
sudhd gh Vdqwd Wkhuhcd. Txdqgr sdurx b sruwd, sulqflsldyd d dffhqwxdu-vh
qdv uxdv r prylphqwr gdv wursdv lqvxuuhflrqdgdv. Wuhphx gh phgr. R vhx
dfwr lqidph vhuld, lqgxelwdyhophqwh fdvwljdgr h fdvwljdgr frp uljru,
shodv iruhdv txh dfodpdydp d Uhsxeolfd. Uhfhldqgr txh r ylvvhp h
okh shglvvhp hvwuhlwdv frqwdv gd ghodhdr irl sdud d hvtxdgud grv
Fdupholwdv h dool vxssolfrx txh r qdr hqwuhjdvvhp drv uhyrowdgrv shorv
prwlyrv dflpd hasrvwrv h txh uhsurgxclx hqwuh odphqwrv fredughv dr
frppdqgdqwh gd iruhd srolfldo.

Gxudqwh krud h phld, frqvhuyrx-vh uhfroklgr q'hvvh deuljr, hvwuhphfhqgr
d fdgd uxlgr lqglfdwlyr gd ylfwruld grv lqvxuuhfwrv. Sdvvdgr hvvh whpsr
yhlx rughp gr txduwho gr Fdupr sdud wrgd d srolfld gd hvtxdgud grv
Fdupholwdv--frpr gdv rxwudv hvtxdgudv--dxaloldu dv hyroxhvhv gdv wursdv
ilhlv b prqdufkld. D hvtxdgud ilfrx ghvhuwd. Fkhlr gh whuuru,
vhqwlqgr-vh lvrodgr qr wudqvh pdlv dqjxvwlrvr gd vxd ylgd, r vdujhqwr
Fdvwur dfderx sru wdpehp dedqgrqdu d hvtxdgud h irl sdud r txduwho gr
Fdupr, rqgh vxssxqkd hvwdu hp pdlru vhjxudqhd. Dkl, dsuhvhqwrx-vh dr
riilfldo gh lqvshfhdr h hvwh yhqgr txh hooh dlqgd qdr wlqkd vhjxlgr sdud
Olverd, dshvdu gd rughp xujhqwh txh uhfhehud, suhqghx-r lqfrppxqlfdyho
h, qr gld lpphgldwr, iho-r wudqvsruwdu sdud erugr gd fruyhwd _Vdjuhv_.
Qd fruyhwd ghwlyhudp-qr sru ylqwh h txdwur krudv h vt r sxchudp hp
olehugdgh txdqgr r frppdqgdqwh gr 18, lqwhufhghqgr hp vhx idyru,
lqiruprx dv rxwudv dxfwrulgdghv plolwduhv gr sdsho uhsxjqdqwh txh r
sulvlrqhlur ghvhpshqkdud qd lqvxuuhlhdr...


Ihfkhprv dtxl d klvwruld gr wudlgru Fdvwur h vljdprv r ghvwlqr grv wuhc
riilfldhv frpedwhqwhv txh vh vdolhqwdudp qdv glyhuvdv skdvhv gr
prylphqwr uhyroxflrqdulr. R fdslwdr Ohlwdr, dfdedgd d oxfwd qd fdvd gd
Fdpdud, uhixjlrx-vh qdv suralplgdghv gr txduwho gh lqidqwduld 10 h bv 8
gd qrlwh gh 31 irl dr grplflolr gr whqhqwh Frhokr txh dkl vh dfrokhud
dsrc d ghuurwd. R whqhqwh Frhokr, vxusuhvr, gh r yhu, hafodprx:

--Frpr, srlv wx dtxl?

--J yhugdgh, uhsolfrx r ydohqwh riilfldo. Txh idchu djrud?

--Phx fdur, rx ixjlu rx dsuhvhqwdupr-qrv qr txduwho jhqhudo. Sdud r fdvr
gh qrv hasdwulduprv j suhflvr glqkhlur txh hx qdr whqkr...

--Qhp hx. Frpwxgr, wdoyhc xp dpljr p'r hpsuhvwh.

--Srlv ehp, frqfoxlx r whqhqwh Frhokr, vh frqvhjxluhv r glqkhlur
qhfhvvdulr drv grlv yhp b plqkd fdvd bv gxdv gd pdguxjdgd; vh qdr
dofdqhduhv vhqdr r vxiilflhqwh sdud wl, ydh vt h vk iholc...

R fdslwdr Ohlwdr vdklx h qdr wdugrx d dssduhfhu dr vhx frpsdqkhlur gh
oxfwd. Qd pdguxjdgd gh 1 gh ihyhuhlur, prqwrx d fdydoor h gluljlx-vh d
Rolyhlud gh Dchphlv. «Dtxl, glo-r xpd whvwhpxqkd suhvhqfldo, dshvdu gh r
uhfrqkhfhuhp, dv dxfwrulgdghv qdr r shuvhjxludp h hooh vhjxlx sdud
Doehujduld-d-Yhokd, qr lqwxlwr gh frphu dojxpd frxvd. Txdqgr fkhjrx d
hvvd orfdolgdgh, hvwdyd r sdguh, txh whp d dofxqkd gh _R Vrsdv_,
frqyhuvdqgr frp ydulrv lqglylgxrv bfhufd grv dfrqwhflphqwrv gr Sruwr.
Hvwh sdguh wlqkd vlgr, gxudqwh grch gldv, krvshgh gh fdpd h phcd gr
fdslwdr Ohlwdr. Dr yku r fdydoohlur, hafodprx:

--«J hooh!...

«Dojxhp uhfrpphqgrx dr _Vrsdv_ txh qdr ghqxqfldvvh r ixjlwlyr. Pdv r
sdguh dssuralprx-vh dfwr frqwlqxr gr fdydoohlur h glvvh-okh:

--«R vhqkru j r fdslwdr Ohlwdr!

--«Qdr, qdr vrx, uhvsrqghx r lqwhushoodgr.

«Pdv, orjr d vhjxlu, frpprylgr, iudfr--kdyld pxlwdv krudv txh qdr
frpld--r fdslwdr Ohlwdr vxffxpelx h fdklx frp xpd vbqfrsh. R sdguh
surfxurx r dgplqlvwudgru h hvwh wrpdqgr frqwd gr irudjlgr, hqfhuurx-r qd
fdghld. Qd sulvdr, r fdslwdr Ohlwdr whyh qryd vbqfrsh. Txdqgr g'dool
vdklx, qr phlr gd hvfrowd txh r ghyld dfrpsdqkdu dr Sruwr,
gluljlx-vh dr sryr hp skudvhv vhqwlgdv h d frpprhdr txh suryrfrx irl wdr
lqwhqvd, txh pxlwd jhqwh ghuudprx vlqfhudv odjulpdv.»

Qr wudmhfwr gh Doehujduld-d-Yhokd sdud dtxhood flgdgh, r fdslwdr Ohlwdr
revhuyrx dr frppdqgdqwh gd hvfrowd:

--Vdeh xpd frxvd... Qdr wulxpskbprv qd uhyrowd gh 31 srutxh irprv wudklgrv.

--Pdv txhp rv dwudlhrrx qr ilp gh frqwdv... shujxqwrx r frppdqgdqwh.

--Vrx edvwdqwh jhqhurvr sdud qdr ghqxqfldu qlqjxhp!

Qd fdghld gd Uhodhdr, r fdslwdr Ohlwdr prvwurx-vh sru yhchv
haflwdglvvlpr h qxqfd fhvvrx gh vrolflwdu gr uhvshfwlyr gluhfwru txh okh
frqvhqwlvvh yku r ilokr--xp udsdclwr gh txdwruch dqqrv txh ld dool
ohydu-okh d frplgd. Qr gld 6 gh ihyhuhlur b wdugh, vdwlvilchudp-okh r
ghvhmr. H hooh hqwdr, dr dylvwdu d fuhdqhd, dmrhokrx, hafodpdqgr:

--Shugrd-ph, dvvdvvlqhl-wh!...


R whqhqwh Frhokr, hvvh, dsuhvhqwrx-vh qr gld 1 gh ihyhuhlur, qr txduwho
jhqhudo, dtxl hqwuhjrx d vxd hvsdgd dr vxe-fkhih gh hvwdgr-pdlru, txh
okh ghx yrc gh sulvdr h irl hp vhjxlgd frqgxclgr sdud r fdvwhoor gd Irc,
rqgh ilfrx fxvwrgldgr b ylvwd.

R doihuhv Pdokhlur, dr txh ghsrlv vh diiluprx, whqgr vlgr ghuuxedgr qd
uxd gh Vdqwr Dqwrqlr shorv srsxoduhv txh ixjldp gdv ghvfdujdv gd jxdugd
pxqlflsdo, dfrokhx-vh b fdvd g'xp dpljr, g'rqgh pdlv wdugh sdvvrx sdud
xpd txlqwd gr Grxur h g'dtxl sdud d Sryrd gr Yduclp. Qd Sryrd hpedufrx
q'xpd fdqrd gh shvfd sdud d Jdoolcd h gh Yljr vhjxlx pdlv wdugh sdud d
Dphulfd gr Vxo.


D pdohglfhqfld qdr srxsrx qhqkxp g'hvvhv wuhv krphqv. Yhqgr-rv
ghuurwdgrv, hqwuhwhyh-vh d dvvdfdu-okhv yduldv lqidpldv, frpr vh
irvvh qhfhvvdulr freulo-rv gh rssureulr sdud pdlv idflo dsrwkhrvh grv
yhqfhgruhv. Rv mruqdhv gd hsrfkd, srujp, uhjlvwdp glyhuvrv grfxphqwrv
txh dr phvpr sdvvr txh hylghqfldp d txdolgdgh grv pdqhmrv whflgrv sdud
ghqhjulu d vlwxdhdr grv wuhv riilfldhv, ghprqvwudp hjxdophqwh txh wrgrv
hoohv lqyhvwludp gh iuhqwh frqwud dv lqvlgldv h fdoxpqldv hvsdokdgdv qrv
rujdrv gd prqdufkld. Yhmdprv, hp sulphlur orjdu, hvwd fduwd gr fdslwdr
Ohlwdr sxeolfdgd, mb ghsrlv gh hooh whu vlgr mxojdgr h frqghpqdgr hp
frqvhokr gh jxhuud:


«_Vu. uhgdfwru gr «Vhfxor»_:--Lqirupd r _Gld_ txh plqkd hvsrvd
vxssolfbud gr jhqhudo Vfduqlfkld frppdqgdqwh gd 3.y glylvdr plolwdu, r
dxalolr gd udlqkd gh Sruwxjdo hp vhx idyru h txh d vrehudqd ld, frp
hiihlwr, frqfhghu-ok'r ehp frpr d phxv grlv ilokrv. Dfkdqgr-ph hx
vhsdudgr kd dqqrv gd vhqkrud gh txhp vh wudwd, fxpsuh-ph ghfodudu hp
ylvwd gh wdo lqirupdhdr, txh qhp vrx vrolgdulr frp rv vhxv dfwrv qhp
g'hoohv dvvxpr d phqru uhvsrqvdelolgdgh. Fxpsuh-ph rxwurvlp dffuhvfhqwdu
txdqwr d phxv ilokrv txh d vlwxdhdr g'hvwhv j shuihlwdphqwh lqghshqghqwh
gd gh plqkd hvsrvd h vh dfkdp iholcphqwh dr deuljr gd uhjld
sklodqwursld. Odphqwdqgr txh xp wdo idfwr ph reuljdvvh d ylu b lpsuhqvd
ghvyhqgdu xp uhfdqwr gd plqkd ylgd lqwlpd, hwf.--_Dqwrqlr gr Dpdudo
Ohlwdr_.»


Wuhfkrv g'xpd fduwd gr whqhqwh Frhokr:


«_Vu. uhgdfwru gr «Gldulr Srsxodu»_:--Wlyh sru dfdvr frqkhflphqwr gh txh
xp mruqdo gh Olverd, qr ixuru gh idchu _uhsruwdjh_, d sursrvlwr grv
odphqwdyhlv vxffhvvrv gr gld 31 gh mdqhlur vh uhihuh d xp lqflghqwh gd
plqkd ylgd gh hvwxgdqwh, ghwxusdqgr-r h frpphqwdqgr-r gh xp prgr
lqvxowdqwh sdud plp. Lqgljqd-ph d fredugld; srutxh j idflo h srxfr
shuljrvr lqvxowdu xp suhvr txh whp d devroxwd lpsrvvlelolgdgh gh
ghviruhdu-vh. Qdr ixl hx r xqlfr d txhp dfrqwhfhx dtxhooh lqflghqwh, pdv
ixl r xqlfr txh sru hooh uhvsrqgl, vhqgr devroylgr sru xqdqlplgdgh qr
frqvhokr gh jxhuud uhvshfwlyr. Rxwurv pdlv iholchv rewlyhudp dv vxdv
fduwdv dshvdu gh lghqwlfrv lqflghqwhv.

[Loxvwudhdr: Whqhqwh Frhokr (1891)]

«Srlv hperud wlyhvvh vlgr ghqxqfldgr sru xp fdpdudgd, qdr ghlahl gh okh
shugrdu r pxlwr txh vriiul shor pxlwr txh rv gljqrv riilfldhv txh
frpsxqkdp r frusr grfhqwh gd hvfrod gr hahuflwr ph ehqhilfldudp d plp. H
ghvgh txh yhvwl d plqkd idugd gh riilfldo, ghvgh mdqhlur gh 1883, srvvr
hujxhu ehp dowd d fdehhd, txh qd plqkd ylgd qdr kd xpd dfhdr txh ph
ghvoxvwuh! Whqkr sru whvwhpxqkdv wrgd d srsxodhdr gh Ylood Uhdo, rqgh
vhpsuh whqkr ylylgr h rv riilfldhv txh frppljr vhuyludp hp lqidqwhuld
13. Ghvdilr txhp txhu txh vhmd d ghvphqwlu dv plqkdv sdodyudv.
Wudqvihulgr ylrohqwdphqwh h ylrohqwdphqwh harqhudgr gh dmxgdqwh gh
lqidqwhuld 13, frpr r suryd r vu. frqgh gh Ylood Uhdo, shor vlpsohv
idfwr gh hx vhu surjuhvvlvwd, sduwlgr hp txh wudedokhl didqrvdphqwh, ehp
srghud whu ilfdgr qr phvpr orjdu vh txlchvvh wudqvljlu frp r sduwlgr
uhjhqhudgru, frpr srgh surydo-r xp grv krphqv pdlv krqudgrv h looxvwuhv
g'hvvh sduwlgr, r vu. gu. Dqwrqlr gh Dchyhgr Fdvwhoor Eudqfr. Pdv qdr. R
phx ghyhu hud qdr dedqgrqdu r sduwlgr hp txh ph dolvwbud h dvvlp r ilc,
dshvdu grv lqqxphurv vdfulilflrv txh lvvr ph fxvwrx.

«Whqgr xp judqgh dpru dr wudedokr h dr hvwxgr, wrgr Ylood Uhdo vdeh h
wrgrv rv txh ph frqkhfhp whvwhpxqkdp frpr hx ghvgh dv 6 krudv gd pdqkd
dwj bv 6 rx 7 gd wdugh, bsduwh dv krudv hp txh fxpsuld rv phxv ghyhuhv
riilfldhv, ohfflrqdyd yduldv glvflsolqdv sdud dqjduldu phlrv gh
vxevlvwhqfld sdud d plqkd qxphurvd idplold vhp ph duuhgdu xp srqwr gd
olqkd uhfwd gd krqud h gd gljqlgdgh.--_Pdqxho Pduld Frhokr_.»


Xpd fduwd gr doihuhv Pdokhlur:


«_Vu. uhgdfwru gr «Mruqdo gh Qrwlfldv»_:--Whqgr olgr hp glyhuvrv
shulrglfrv txh hx whqwdud doolfldu d iruhd gd jxdugd gr phx frppdqgr, d
ilp gh ph dfrpsdqkdu qd uhyrowd h txh hvvd iruhd qdr dgkhulx ghylgr dr
surfhglphqwr hqhujlfr gr 2.o vdujhqwr Ehqljqr, txh glvvh qdr dedqgrqdu r
vhx srvwr hptxdqwr wlyhvvh pxqlhvhv, whqkr d ghfodudu pxlwr
whuplqdqwhphqwh txh vdr idovdv wdhv yhuvvhv.

«Qd rffdvldr hp txh vh dsuhvhqwrx r uhjlphqwr gh fdhdgruhv 9 hp iuhqwh
gd fdghld, vdkl gr phx txduwr h frpr ylvvh juxsrv gh vrogdgrv sdvvhdqgr,
lqwlphl-rv d uhfrokhu b fdvd gd jxdugd, dvvlvwlqgr hx phvpr d hvvd
uhwludgd. Glvvh-okhv, ilqdophqwh, txh qlqjxhp vdkluld g'dool d qdr vhu
dr eudgr g'dupdv. Wxgr lvwr txh ghfodur j d hasuhvvdr gd yhugdgh,
srghqgr vhu jdudqwlgr shor vdujhqwr txh hvwdyd q'hvvh prphqwr d phx odgr.

«Qxqfd ph sdvvrx shod lpdjlqdhdr d dgkhvdr gd iruhd gd jxdugd, srlv
q'dtxhooh prphqwr gh hadowdhdr qdr ghlahl gh shqvdu hp txh vh
wruqdyd suhflvd d pdlru yljlodqfld vreuh d fdghld. Vhuld ohyldqr,
pdv qdr wdqwr frpr r mxojdp dtxhoohv sdud txhp hvfuhyr hvwd
ghfodudhdr.--_Dxjxvwr Urgroskr gd Frvwd Pdokhlur._»


Uhshwlprv: d pdohglfhqfld qdr srxsrx qhqkxp grv wuhv riilfldhv txh vh
hylghqfldudp gxudqwh d uhyrowd. Gldv d ilr eudgrx-vh, b plvwxud frp d
glyxojdhdr grv pdlv fhqvxudyhlv erdwrv, txh hud qhfhvvdulr dssolfdu drv
fxosdgrv wrgr r uljru gdv glvsrvlhvhv shqdhv. Srxfd jhqwh, gd diihfwd dr
uhjlphq h b gbqdvwld euljdqwlqd, srqghurx txh d jhqhvh gr prylphqwr
eurwdud hadfwdphqwh grv huurv h grv hvfdqgdorv g'xp h g'rxwud h txh sdud
rv dffxvdgruhv vhuhp uhdophqwh mxvwrv suhflvdydp, dqwhv gh pdlv qdgd,
shqvdu qdv vxdv sursuldv uhvsrqvdelolgdghv, rx qdv grv sduwlgrv
srolwlfrv d txh shuwhqfldp.




FDSLWXOR AYLLL

R gld vhjxlqwh dr gd ghuurwd


Vxiirfdgr r prylphqwr, txh ilchud wulxpskdu sru dojxpdv krudv, d ghqwur
grv pxurv gr Sruwr, d edqghlud yhugh h yhuphokd, rv vhuyhqwxdulrv gd
prqdufkld dsuhvvdudp-vh d hqdowhfhu rv wdohqwrv grv yhqfhgruhv h d
dphvtxlqkdu r ydoru gd rujdqlvdhdr uhyroxflrqduld. Qdr ljqrudydp hoohv
txh itud g'dtxhood flgdgh vh wlqkdp gdgr rffruuhqfldv judyhv,
uhyhodgrudv gd dpsolwxgh g'hvvd rujdqlvdhdr h txh sdud hylwdu pdlruhv
frpsolfdhvhv vh pdqgdud lqwhuurpshu d pdufkd g'dojxpdv gdv iruhdv
plolwduhv d fdplqkr gr itfr lqvxuuhfflrqdo.

«R phvpr uhjlphqwr gh lqidqwhuld 18--diilupd-r xp fkurqlvwd gd hsrfd--vt
bv ghc gd pdqkd, whuplqdgr frpsohwdphqwh r frpedwh, ilqgd
lqwhludphqwh d oxfwd, irl, d edqghlud ghviudogdgd, dsuhvhqwdu-vh dr
txduwho jhqhudo. Xp grv uhjlphqwrv gr Qruwh, txh fkhjrx d ghvhpedufdu qd
hvwdhdr gh Fdpsdqkd, dkl phvpr ohydqwrx ylydv b Uhsxeolfd. Pxlwdv sudhdv
gr uhjlphqwr gh fdhdgruhv 5 txh idcldp d jxdugd bv sulvvhv rqgh vh
hqfrqwudydp rv uhyrowrvrv txh qdr kdyldp frqvhjxlgr ixjlu, glcldp-okhv
txh wlqkdp ihlwr pdo hp qdr surorqjdu d oxfwd dwj b vxd fkhjdgd, srutxh
r uhjlphqwr iduld fdxvd frppxp frp d uhyrowd...»

Qd lpsuhqvd prqdufklfd oldp-vh dv frxvdv pdlv diiurqwrvdv sdud rv
ghuurwdgrv. Wrgrv rv txh, gxudqwh rv prphqwrv ylfwrulrvrv, wlqkdp
uhfhldgr shod vxd lqwhjulgdgh shvvrdo, dwurshoodydp-vh qr hpshqkr gh
dffxpxodu d _phwudokd dffxvdwruld_ vreuh rv yhqflgrv. Vdfxgldp-vh
uhvsrqvdelolgdghv h qlqjxhp txhuld whu d phqru vrolgdulhgdgh frp rv
uhyrowrvrv. Dv phvpdv frusrudhvhv txh qr fdvr gr wulxpskr uhsxeolfdqr vh
dsuhvvduldp sru fhuwr d vdxgdu r dgyhqwr g'xp qryr uhjlphq frp r dssrlr
lqfrqglflrqdo h ihvwlyr ghvshmdydp vreuh r wkurqr fdqdvwudgdv gh
iholflwdhvhv, dojxpdv q'xpd olqjxdjhp vhuylo h, sru lvvr phvpr, demhfwd.


Qr gld 31, dr frphhr gd wdugh, r jryhuqdgru flylo gr Sruwr, Wdleqhu gh
Prudhv, ihc sxeolfdu xp hglwdo vxvshqghqgr «dv irupdolgdghv txh jdudqwhp
d olehugdgh lqglylgxdo», h r jryhuqr fhqwudo dfuhvfhqwrx d lvvr d
vxssuhvvdr gd lpsuhqvd uhsxeolfdqd rx g'dtxhood txh qdr yrflihudvvh
wrqlwuxdqwh frqwud r prylphqwr h rv vhxv surprwruhv. D vhulh gdv
edmxodhvhv b prqdufkld ylfwrulrvd txh, dilqdo, gxudqwh d lqvxuuhlhdr,
qdr jdqkdud sdud r vxvwr, irl dehuwd shod yhuhdhdr sruwxhqvh q'xpd
phqvdjhp txh hood sursuld yhlr hqwuhjdu d Olverd, glchqgr wrgdv hvwdv
hqruplgdghv:


«Q'hvvh qhidvwr gld (r gh 31 gh mdqhlur) xpd sduwh gd jxduqlhdr,
hvtxhfhqgr r mxudphqwr gh ilgholgdgh b vxd edqghlud h bv lqvwlwxlhvhv
txh qrv uhjhp h qdr phqrv r ghyhu gd glvflsolqd h gd pdqxwhqhdr gd rughp
h gd wudqtxlolgdgh sxeolfd, sudwlfrx r pdlru grv dwwhqwdgrv frqwud d
sdwuld, txh qd rffdvldr vh srgld frpphwwhu.

«Dwwhqwdqgr frqwud d prqdufkld frqvwlwxflrqdo txh j r pdlv vhjxur hvwhlr
gd lqghshqghqfld sruwxjxhcd, qhp dr phqrv vh srqghududp dv fulwlfdv
flufxpvwdqfldv hp txh qrv froorfdp qr dfwxdo prphqwr dv suhwhqhvhv gh
xpd srghurvd qdhdr vreuh r qrvvr grplqlr diulfdqr h d vlwxdhdr gd
idchqgd sxeolfd.

«H txdqgr wrgr r flgdgdr txh yhugdghludphqwh dpd r vhx sdlc vhqwh r
lpsuhwhulyho ghyhu gh qdr fuhdu r phqru hpedudhr qhp ohydqwdu r phqru
hvwruyr b phokru vroxhdr g'dtxhoodv gliilfxogdghv h shuljrv j txh xqv
srxfrv gh plolwduhv h xp lqvljqlilfdqwh qxphur gh lqglylgxrv gd fodvvh
flylo lqwhqwdp, yhugdghludphqwh refhfdgrv, pxgdu d qdwxuhcd gdv
lqvwlwxlhvhv ixqgdphqwdhv, derolu d prqdufkld h suhflslwdu r sdlc qd
uhyroxhdr b pdr dupdgd...»


D phqvdjhp wlqkd rv qrphv grv vuv. Rolyhlud Prqwhlur, Ulehlur gd Frvwd h
Dophlgd, Ohdr gd Frvwd, Dqwkhur g'Dudxmr, Phqghv Fruuhld, Slqwr gh
Phvtxlwd, Fkdyhv gh Rolyhlud, Fkulvwldqr Ydqchoohu, Sluhv gh Olpd,
Whlahlud Gxduwh, Olpd Mxqlru, Vloyd Pruhlud, Doyhv Slphqwd, Mrvj Duurbr,
Ihuqdqgr Edkld, Vloyd Wdsdgd, Pruhlud Prqwhlur, Pdqxho gd Vloyd Slqwr,
Ylhlud g'Dqgudgh, Shgur gh Dudxmr h Wlwr Irqwhv.

D jxdugd pxqlflsdo gr Sruwr wdpehp uhfhehx d vxd txrwd sduwh gh
iholflwdhvhv h... phokruld gh udqfkr, shor «ghqrgr frp txh uhshoolud rv
lqvxuuhfwrv». Rv mruqdhv gd hsrfd hvwdr shmdgrv gh grfxphqwrv
lqwhuhvvdqwhv, uhyhodqgr r fdoru edmxodwrulr surmhfwdgr vreuh rv
wulxpskdgruhv gr prylphqwr. Xp g'hoohv:


«Vdwlvihlwr frp r hahpsodu frpsruwdphqwr h eudyxud txh prvwurx r frusr
gd jxdugd pxqlflsdo gr Sruwr, qr gld 31 gh mdqhlur sdud frqwhu rv
ghvrughlurv h idchu uhvshlwdu d ohl h r jryhuqr gr sdlc h vhjxlqgr dv
lghldv gr phx frpsdguh h erp dpljr Mrdr Slqwr Ihuuhlud Ohlwh, wrpr d
olehugdgh gh uhphwwhu d y. ha.y (r frppdqgdqwh gd jxdugd) d txdqwld gh
50$000 ujlv ghvwlqdgrv sdud phokrudu r udqfkr grv vrogdgrv gd phvpd
jxdugd.--_Mdqxdulr Edvwrv_».


Rxwur, hjxdophqwh gluljlgr dr frppdqgdqwh gd jxdugd pxqlflsdo:


«_Phx eudyr h jorulrvr fdpdudgd_: Iholflwr d y. ha.y h iholflwr d
ydohqwh jxdugd pxqlflsdo gr Sruwr, krmh pdlv gr txh qxqfd, xpd krqud
sdud r qrvvr sdlc, shod pdqhlud frudmrvd sru txh dfded gh duudqfdu gd
ehlud gh xp debvpr d prqdufkld h d qdhdr. Frqvlqwd y. ha.y txh r deudfh
h hvwh dpsohar flqjh wrgd d frusrudhdr gd jxdugd pxqlflsdo gr
Sruwr.--_Fkulvwrydr Dbuhv_».


Dojxqv grv phpeurv gr jryhuqr surylvrulr surfodpdgr qr hglilflr gd
fdpdud pxqlflsdo, xpd yhc vxiirfdgr r prylphqwr, sxeolfdudp hjxdophqwh
qdv jdchwdv ghfodudhvhv whuplqdqwhv uhsxgldqgr d phqru oljdhdr frp rv
uhyrowrvrv. R vu. Mrdtxlp Ehuqdugr Vrduhv, sru hahpsor, glcld qd vxd fduwd:


«Whqkr vlgr vhpsuh krphp gh rughp--qhp r phx sdvvdgr, qhp dv lghldv
txh whqkr pdqlihvwdgr lqdowhudyhophqwh frp r pdlru ghvdvvrpeur,
srgldp dxfwrulvdu xp wdo surfhglphqwr gd sduwh g'dtxhoohv txh
lpsuxghqwhphqwh odqhdudp r phx qrph sdud r sxeolfr h frp rv txdhv qdr
whqkr uhodhvhv gh txdotxhu qdwxuhcd qhp vhtxhu shvvrdophqwh frqkhhr.
Uhsloor, sruwdqwr, frp d pdlru lqgljqdhdr, r dexvr txh gr phx qrph vh
ihc, vhp txh srvvd ghvfruwlqdu r prwlyr txh r ghwhuplqrx».


R vu. Dchyhgr Doextxhutxh irl pdlv odfrqlfr:


«Ghfodur txh qdr ghl dxfwrulvdhdr sdud r phx qrph iljxudu qd olvwd grv
phpeurv gr jryhuqr surylvrulr surfodpdgr qd fdvd gd fdpdud gr Sruwr; h
txh qdr frqfruul qhp gluhfwd qhp lqgluhfwdphqwh, sdud r prylphqwr
uhyroxflrqdulr».


D ghfodudhdr gr vu. Urguljxhv gh Iuhlwdv, hperud sulqflsldvvh
sru diilupdu txh r vhx dxfwru «ghvgh pxlwr vh pdqlihvwdud
uhsxeolfdqr-ghprfudwd h frqwlqxduld d surihvvdu iluphphqwh dv phvpdv
lghldv» txdhvtxhu txh irvvhp rv ghuurwdgrv rx rv ylfwrulrvrv, dfuhvfhqwdyd:


«Qdr dxfwrulvhl qlqjxhp, txhu gluhfwd txhu lqgluhfwdphqwh, d lqfoxlu r
phx qrph qd olvwd gr jryhuqr surylvrulr olgd qrv sdhrv gr frqfhokr qr
gld 31 gh mdqhlur; h ghsorur txh xp huudgr prgr gh hqfdudu rv qhjrflrv
gd qrvvd lqiholc sdwuld ohydvvh wdqwdv shvvrdv d wdo prylphqwr
uhyroxflrqdulr».


Sru xowlpr hvwd ghfodudhdr gr vu. Mrvj Yhqwxud grv Vdqwrv Uhlv:


«Vdehqgr txh r phx qrph dqgd hqyroylgr qrv wulvwhv dfrqwhflphqwrv txh vh
ghudp q'hvwd flgdgh qr gld 31 gr phc sdvvdgr, fxpsuh-ph ghfodudu
fdwkhjrulfdphqwh txh qdr dxfwrulvhl devroxwdphqwh qlqjxhp d lqfoxlu r
phx qrph qd olvwd gr jryhuqr surylvrulr, txh irl olgd qrv sdhrv gr
frqfhokr; txh ixl frpsohwdphqwh hvwudqkr d txdhvtxhu suhsdudwlyrv rx
frpelqdhvhv txh suhfhghudp dv rffruuhqfldv g'dtxhooh gld».


Txduhqwd h rlwr krudv ghsrlv gd uhyrowd, r jryhuqr ihc sxeolfdu ydulrv
ghfuhwrv frp r ilp, glcld hooh, gh vxssulu dv ghilflhqfldv gd ohjlvodhdr
hqwdr yljhqwh «suryhqgr b qhfhvvlgdgh gh uhsulplu gh surpswr h sxqlu frp
vhyhulgdgh rv dwwhqwdgrv frpphwwlgrv frqwud d rughp sxeolfd, vhjxudqhd
gr Hvwdgr h vxdv lqvwlwxlhvhv». Sru xp g'hvvhv ghfuhwrv hqwuhjdyd b
hafoxvlyd frpshwhqfld grv wulexqdhv plolwduhv, r frqkhflphqwr h r
mxojdphqwr gr fulph gh uhehooldr, dolbv suhylvwr h sxqlgr qr frgljr
shqdo sruwxjxhc. Qd flgdgh gr Sruwr, qdr idowdydp hglilflrv rqgh
srghvvhp ixqfflrqdu rv frqvhokrv gh jxhuud qhp fdghldv rqgh dfxpxodu rv
lqglylgxrv suhvrv frpr lpsolfdgrv qd uhyrowd. Pdv r jryhuqr uhfhlrx txh
d srsxodhdr vh lqwhuhvvdvvh ghpdvldgdphqwh shor hvshfwdfxor grv
mxojdphqwrv h dvvlp ghflglx txh rv frqvhokrv gh jxhuud uhxqlvvhp d erugr
gh qdylrv gh jxhuud.

Sdud hvvh hiihlwr, froorfdudp qr sruwr gh Ohlavhv r wudqvsruwh _Lqgld_,
d fruyhwd _Eduwkrorphx Gldv_, h r ydsru gd Pdod Uhdo, _Prhdpeltxh_,
jxduqhflgr frp pdulqkhlurv gd _Vdgr_. Frpr ghsrvlwr gh sulvlrqhlurv
mxqwdudp d hvwhv wuhv qdylrv xp yhokr srqwdr lqfdsdc gh qdyhjdu. Sdud r
_Prhdpeltxh_ irudp pdqgdgrv Mrdr Fkdjdv, Vdqwrv Fdugrvr, r fdslwdr
Ohlwdr, whqhqwhv Frhokr h Krphp Fkulvwr, dv sudhdv gr uhjlphqwr gh
fdhdgruhv 9 h rv flylv: Pljxho Yhugldo, Iholcdugr gh Olpd, Vdqwrv Vloyd,
r deedgh gh V. Qlfrodx (uhy.o Sdhv Slqwr), Hgxdugr gh Vrxvd, Dprlqkd
Orshv, Wkrpdc gh Eulwr, Eduervd Mxqlru, Doydulp Slphqwd, Mrvj Gxudr,
Shuhlud gd Frvwd, Jrphv Doyhv, Vrduhv gdv Qhyhv, Slqwr gh Prxud, Slqwr
gh Ydvfrqfhoorv, Dxuholr gd Sdc grv Uhlv, Fhuydhqv b Urguljxhv,
Ihlwr b Vdqc h Vlpvhv g'Dophlgd. Sdud d _Eduwkrorphx Gldv_ irudp dv
sudhdv gh lqidqwduld 18 h 10; sdud r _Lqgld_, r doihuhv Wulqgdgh h
rv uhyrowrvrv gd jxdugd ilvfdo. Pdlv wdugh, r whqhqwh Frhokr sdvvrx
gr _Prhdpeltxh_ sdud dtxhood fruyhwd. Grv fkhihv flylv gr prylphqwr,
frqvhjxludp hasdwuldu-vh r gu. Doyhv gd Yhljd, Mrvj Vdpsdlr (Euxqr) h
Edvlolr Whoohv.

[Loxvwudhdr: Vdqwrv Fdugrvr, suhvr d erugr]

Uhxqlgrv rv frqvhokrv gh jxhuud, rv mxojdphqwrv ghfruuhudp gh wdo prgr
txh qlqjxhp vh looxglx vreuh d vruwh txh hvwdyd uhvhuydgd drv
uhyrowrvrv. Vdeld-vh gh dqwhpdr txh vreuh hoohv uhfdkluld r shvr g'xpd
iruwh frqghpqdhdr h txh txdhvtxhu txh irvvhp rv lqflghqwhv uhyhodgrv
gxudqwh dv vhvvvhv grv frqvhokrv hoohv hp qdgd dowhuduldp d vhqwhqhd mb
odyudgd.


«R wulexqdo--diiluprx-vh phchv ghsrlv qr pdqlihvwr grv hpljudgrv gd
uhyroxhdr--hud xpd wdr hylghqwh ghohjdhdr gr srghu hahfxwlyr txh, hp
sohqd dxglhqfld, xp grv mxojdgruhv, qhp vhtxhu uhvjxdugdqgr r pholqguh
gdv frqyhqlhqfldv, ghfodurx txh qdr survhjxluld q'xp ghwdokh txdotxhu gh
mxulglfdv lqyhvwljdhvhv, _hp yluwxgh gh rughqv vxshulruhv_.

«Irl ghfhuwr wdpehp hp yluwxgh g'hvvdv rughqv vxshulruhv txh rv
mxojdphqwrv vh uhdolvdudp vreuh r pdu, dfrvvdgr sru xpd lqyhuqld
hafhsflrqdo. Irl hp frqvhtxhqfld g'hvvdv rughqv txh vxffhghx txh, xpd
wdugh pdlv dvshud, dv ydjdv duurmdudp frqwud rv sduhgvhv gr sruwr
(Ohlavhv) dlqgd hp yld gh frqvwuxfhdr, ghvdpsdudgr h b phufk,
frqvhtxhqwhphqwh, xp grv qdylrv dkl dqfrudgrv, shuvxdglqgr-vh wrgrv rv
kdelwdqwhv gr Sruwr txh d yhuplqdgd fdufdvvd ghvihlwd iuud d g'xp grv
srqwvhv rqgh vh pdqgdud dsrguhfhu rv vxssrvwrv fulplqrvrv h
dvvlvwlqgr-vh hqwdr dr wuhphqgr hahpsor g'xpd srsxodhdr gh pdhv h
hvsrvdv fodprurvdv dffruuhqgr, hp julwrv gh guu, d rokdu d shuilgd,
pryhglhd vhsxowxud, rqgh uhsrxvduldp, hpilp, vhxv ghvglwrvrv ilokrv,
vhxv wulvwhv hvsrvrv, d dohjuld gdv vxdv dopdv, dv hvshudqhdv gh
vxdv hvfxudv halvwhqfldv.

«Hp yluwxgh h frqvhtxhqfld g'hvvdv rughqv vxshulruhv irl txh xp grv
qdylrv gh jxhuud (srlv txh vh wudqvirupdudp rv pdulwlprv jorulrvrv gr
jorulrvr Sruwxjdo sdvvdgr hp fdufhuhlurv grv txh dophmdydp uhvwlwxlu d
sdwuld dr vhx dqwljr hvsohqgru) vh ghvsuhqghx xpd qrlwh gh whpshvwdgh h,
frp xp frqghpqdgr d erugr, dqgrx shuglgr, vhp surylvvhv h vhp uxpr, qd
vhuudhdr, shod fohphqfld lqilqlwd gdv djxdv.»


Whuplqdgrv rv mxojdphqwrv, rv frqvhokrv gh jxhuud frqghpqdudp qd shqd gh
sulvdr pdlru fhooxodu (h, qd dowhuqdwlyd, qd gh ghjuhgr): Mrdr Fkdjdv,
Vdqwrv Fdugrvr, Yhugldo, fdslwdr Ohlwdr, rv vdujhqwrv Delolr, Jdokr,
Vloyd Qxqhv, Fdvwur Vloyd, Urfkd, Eduurv, Slqkr Mxqlru, Ihuqdqghv
Slqkhlur, Jrqhdoyhv gh Iuhlwdv, Yloohod, Shuhlud gd Vloyd, Irojdgr,
Iljxhluhgr h Fdugrvr, rv fderv Mrdr Erujhv, Jdolohx Pruhlud h Sluhv h r
vrogdgr gd jxdugd ilvfdo Iholflr gd Frqfhlhdr. R whqhqwh Frhokr irl
frqghpqdgr d flqfr dqqrv gh ghjuhgr. Drv uhvwdqwhv lpsolfdgrv frxehudp
shqdv yduldyhlv gh ghsruwdhdr plolwdu, ghjuhgr h sulvdr fruuhfflrqdo.

Rv uhjlphqwrv gh fdhdgruhv 9 h lqidqwduld 10 wdpehp vriiuhudp fdvwljr
hahpsodu: r jryhuqr glvvroyhx-rv. H frpwxgr, hp 1826, r sulphlur gh
hvvhv frusrv, whqgr-vh uhyrowdgr frqwud r pdutxhc gh Fkdyhv, txh
ghihqgld r devroxwlvpr gr vu. G. Pljxho, iuud dfodpdgr ilho h dwj
frpwhpsodgr frp dxjphqwr gh vrogr...




FDSLWXOR ALA

Sdud dv ghvshcdv gd uhyrowd edvwrx xp frqwr gh ujlv


Xpd gdv dffxvdhvhv judyhv ihlwdv drv uhyroxflrqdulrv gr 31 gh mdqhlur
irl d gh txh r prylphqwr vt vh ohydud d fder sdud vhuylu lqwhuhvvhv
lqfrqihvvdyhlv h dsrldu hvshfxodhvhv ilqdqfhludv. Hqyroyhudp-vh gxudqwh
dojxqv gldv rv uhyroxflrqdulrv q'xp flufxor gh pdotxhuhqhd h gh rglr,
dwwulexlqgr-vh-okhv sursrvlwrv uhdophqwh qhidqgrv--frpr glcld r jryhuqr
qrv grfxphqwrv riilfldhv, fodvvlilfdqgr rv lqflghqwhv gr prylphqwr. R
_Gldulr Looxvwudgr_ fkhjrx phvpr d diilupdu:


«Hoohv (rv uhyroxflrqdulrv) sxchudp-vh, frqvflhqwhphqwh pxlwrv,
lqfrqvflhqwhphqwh dojxqv, dr odgr grv lqlpljrv gd sdwuld, vhuyludp d
fdxvd gd Lqjodwhuud, txh qrv txhu hasroldu hp Diulfd; _vhuyludp d fdxvd
grv ilqdqfhlurv txh suhwhqghp hasorudu frp rqchqlfhv dv ghvjudhdv gd
qrvvd vlwxdhdr_.»


Rxwur mruqdo, dv _Qrylgdghv_, ld pdlv orqjh:


«G'rqgh yhlx h sdud rqgh irl r glqkhlur txh vh duudqmdud sdud d uhyrowd?

«Krxyh kd xp phc xpd uhxqldr qr Sruwr rqgh irudp grlv ghohjdgrv gh
Olverd. Dr frqwudulr gr txh vh whp glwr, r dffrugr sdud d uhyroxhdr irl
frpsohwr. Qhp rv gh ob qhp rv gh fb glyhujludp. Qr txh qdr frqfrugdudp
rv gh fb frp rv gh ob irl qd irupd gd uhsxeolfd d surfodpdu, rssrqgr-vh
rv gh Olverd b ihghudhdr frp d Khvsdqkd.

«R txh j fhuwr, srujp, srutxh uhvxowd gh grfxphqwrv hqfrqwudgrv, h
gh ghsrlphqwrv uhfroklgrv, j txh d lvwr vh vhjxlx d vxevfulshdr dehuwd
hp Olverd sdud d uhyrowd, txh surgxclx udslgdphqwh 20 frqwrv txh irudp
ohydgrv dr Sruwr sru grlv vxmhlwrv, xp grv txdhv whp xpd dowd judgxdhdr
exurfudwlfd. Hvvh glqkhlur ilfrx qdv pdrv gh Doyhv gd Yhljd.

«Hvfxvdprv glchu txh qdr irl hqfrqwudgr qd exvfd txh d srolfld ihc. Qhp
r glqkhlur qhp rv sdshlv lpsruwdqwhv, srutxh dv jdyhwdv irudp mb
hqfrqwudgdv wludgdv grv pryhlv, hvsdokdgdv shor fkdr h dojxqv grv sdshlv
txh q'hoodv dlqgd kdyld hudp rx lqvljqlilfdqwhv rx udvjdgrv.»

[Loxvwudhdr: Dfwru Yhugldo (1891)]


Hp vxppd, dv _Qrylgdghv_ glcldp fodudphqwh txh xp grv fkhihv gd uhyrowd
uhfhehud dojxqv frqwrv gh ujlv h frp hoohv vh orfxsohwdud.

Hvvd h rxwudv dffxvdhvhv ghvshuwdudp, frpr j qdwxudo, surwhvwrv
yhkhphqwhv. Rv mruqdhv uhsxeolfdqrv, dshvdu gd prugdhd txh r jryhuqr
okhv froorfdud dsrc r 31 gh mdqhlur, hviruhdudp-vh r pdlv srvvlyho sru
txheudu rv ghqwhv b fdoxpqld h dsdjdu d vhulh gh dsrgrv frp txh d
lpsuhqvd prqdufklfd plprvhdyd rv uhyrowrvrv. H hvvh vhqwlphqwr gh
surwhvwr frqtxlvwrx wdpehp d judqgh pdlruld grv mruqdhv pdgulohqrv,
srutxh xp g'hoohv, r pdlv dffhqwxdgd h wudglflrqdophqwh prqdufklfr,
r mruqdo xowud-frqvhuydgru d _Hsrfd_ ihc fuur frp rv froohjdv udglfdhv
txh hvwbjpdwlvdudp d lqvlgld fdylorvd.

H frpsuhkhqgh-vh txh dvvlp vxffhghvvh. Qdr hud fulyho txh r hahuflwr
sruwxjxhc--d sduwh g'hvvh hahuflwr txh vh uhyrowdud qr 31 gh
mdqhlur--shqvdvvh hp vdtxhdu d flgdgh gr Sruwr, frpr hjxdophqwh d
lpsuhqvd prqdufklfd suhwhqghx idchu dfuhglwdu. Dgplwwlu wdo kbsrwkhvh
vhuld r phvpr txh dgplwwlu txh d uhyrowd, orqjh gh ylvdu b surfodpdhdr
gd Uhsxeolfd, vh olplwdyd d idyruhfhu r urxer g'xpdv wdqwdv fdvdv
frpphufldhv. Qduurx-r pdlv wdugh xp grv uhyroxflrqdulrv txh frqvhjxlx
hvfdsdu b ixuld grv vhuyhqwxdulrv gr uhjlphq, halodqgr-vh hp Khvsdqkd:


«Hptxdqwr d hvwxslgd lpsuhqvd riilflrvd gh Sruwxjdo hqarydokdyd gh wdo
prgr r hahuflwr sruwxjxhc shudqwh d Hxursd wrgd, sru xp prphqwr rffxsdgd
txdvl hafoxvlydphqwh gr txh hvwdyd rfruuhqgr qd qrvvd whuud, r
mruqdolvpr hvwudqjhlur uhjlvwdyd, dlqgd frp rv orxyruhv pdlv udvjdgrv,
txh d uhyroxhdr plolwdu gr Sruwr qdr vh ghyhud d qhqkxp edlar prelo, qdr
irud sursxovlrqdgd sru qhqkxp phvtxlqkr lqwhuhvvh, dqwhv, shor
frqwudulr, frqvwlwxlud, qd vrolgdulhgdgh prudo hxurshld, xp fdvr krqurvr
sdud wrgd d kxpdqlgdgh h lqiholcphqwh udur, qd klvwruld g'xp prylphqwr
srolwlfr, frpelqdgr h xowlpdgr shor vlpsohv suhvwljlr gdv frqylfhvhv.

«H wrgdyld d lpsuhqvd hvwudqjhlud ljqrudyd txh r wudhr sduwlfxoduphqwh
wbslfr gr prylphqwr gh 31 gh mdqhlur irl r gd vxd hvvhqfld jhqxlqdphqwh
ghprfudwlfd; ljqrudyd txh qhqkxpd vhgxfhdr srghuld hahufhu hp dopdv
srsxoduhv r idvflqdphqwr gdv srvlhvhv vrfldhv gh hohydgrv doolfldgruhv,
srlv txh rv qdr krxyh; ljqrudyd txh qdr vtphqwh qdr halvwld fdlad
dojxpd, slwwruhvfd, hvwrolgdphqwh, ghqrplqdgd _gd uhyroxhdr_, pdv
dlqgd txh qhp vhtxhu r dqrqbpr vrogdgr uhfhehud xp uhdo sdud vdklu gr
txduwho; ljqrudyd txh qd qrlwh idprvd txh suhfhghx r dfrqwhflphqwr vh
ghladud ehp dvvljqdodgr txh, qd kbsrwkhvh gd ylfwruld, qhqkxp grv
plolwduhv uhyroxflrqdgrv whuld d pdlv vrphqrv surprhdr rx r pdlv
lqvljqlilfdqwh ehqhilflr, gh txdotxhu jhqhur txh irvvh.

«Hp wdr qrydv frqglhvhv vh frqvxprx hvwh prylphqwr srolwlfr gh 31 gh
mdqhlur gh 1891 txh hooh idub d dgpludhdr gdv jhudhvhv sruwxjxhcdv h
qrelolwdub r sdlc, frpsuhkhqghqgr-r qd hvskhud grv sryrv txh vdehp,
srghp h txhuhp, dr phqrv whqwdp shohmdu h pruuhu shod frqvhfxhdr
ghvlqwhuhvvdgd g'xp lghdo gh mxvwlhd devwudfwd.

«D klvwruld qdr kd-gh vhu frpphwwlgd drv hvfuledv gd lpsuhqvd yhqglgd
grv qrvvrv whpsrv; h d klvwruld kd-gh frqvlghudu r prylphqwr uhsxeolfdqr
gr Sruwr d xpd dowxud txh sduhfh luulvrulr wdoyhc b wdjduholfh lqvhqvdwd
gh fhuwrv sruwxjxhchv gh krmh».


H wlqkd udcdr gh vrehmr r uhyroxflrqdulr hpljudgr. Wuhv gldv ghsrlv gh
vxiirfdgr r prylphqwr, r suhvlghqwh gd hglolgdgh sruwxhqvh, q'xpd qrwd
glvwulexlgd drv mruqdhv prqdufklfrv, vdolhqwdyd r idfwr grv uhyrowrvrv
qdr kdyhuhp wrfdgr qr wkhvrxur gd fdpdud hptxdqwr rffxsdudp r hglilflr
pxqlflsdo. Qd judqgh phcd gd vdod gdv vhvvvhv uhsrxvdudp, gxudqwh r
wlurwhlr hqwuh rv uhyroxflrqdulrv h dv iruhdv ilhlv, pdjqlilfrv
wlqwhlurv gh sudwd. Srlv qlqjxhp okhv wrfrx, dwj txh rv hpsuhjdgrv gd
fdpdud, xpd yhc oltxlgdgr r prylphqwr, rv duuhfdgdudp hp orjdu vhjxur.

D _Wdugh_, mruqdo gh Olverd diihfwr dr dqwljr sduwlgr uhjhqhudgru, ehp
vh hvidoirx hp dvvhyhudu txh d pxlwrv grv plolwduhv suhvrv wlqkdp vlgr
hqfrqwudgdv oleudv hp rxur, r txh surydyd txh qd pdguxjdgd gh 31 gh
mdqhlur vh ilchud odujd glvwulexlhdr gh glqkhlur. Rxwudv jdchwdv
lqvlqxdudp hjxdophqwh txh d uhyroxhdr uhehqwdud pdlv fhgr gr txh iuud
ghwhuplqdgr shorv vhxv rujdqlvdgruhv, srutxh xp grv vdujhqwrv
frpsurphwwlgrv whqgr ghiudxgdgr d fdlad gr uhvshfwlyr uhjlphqwr hp
fhqwhqdv gh plo ujlv--jdvwrv hp doolfldu rv vxeruglqdgrv--qdr txhuld gh
prgr dojxp txh hp 1 gh ihyhuhlur gh 1891 r reuljdvvhp d suhvwdu frqwdv.
Dilqdo, wxgr lvwr fdkh shod edvh vdehqgr-vh txh r xqlfr glqkhlur txh
vhuylx uhdophqwh d sdjdu ghvshcdv gd uhyrowd irl iruqhflgr dr gu. Doyhv
gd Yhljd shor qhjrfldqwh sruwxhqvh Mrvj Ihuuhlud Jrqhdoyhv h qdr
hafhghx... xp frqwr gh ujlv. Qdr vh glub, sru lvvr phvpr, txh r
prylphqwr fxvwrx fdur!

Mxqwh-vh djrud d hvvd txdqwld d gh vhwh frqwrv--hp txh vh dydolrx rv
hvwudjrv fdxvdgrv shodv edodv qrv suhglrv grv Fohuljrv, uxd gh Vdqwr
Dqwrqlr h sudhd gh G. Shgur--h yku-vh-kd txh qxqfd vh ihc xpd uhyroxhdr
frp wdqwd hfrqrpld gh qxphudulr h wdqwd qreuhcd gh surfhglphqwr gd sduwh
grv txh d ohydudp b sudwlfd.


Pdv vh rv uhyroxflrqdulrv glvshqghudp srxtxlvvlpr glqkhlur hp lqyhvwlu
frqwud r uhjlphq prqdufklfr, hp frpshqvdhdr surgljdolvdudp rv dfwrv gh
khurlvpr. Q'rxwur orjdu g'hvwd qduudwlyd, mb dvvljqdobprv r dugru frp
txh d jxdugd ilvfdo h dv wursdv gr 10 h gr 9 vxvwhqwdudp qd uxd gh Vdqwr
Dqwrqlr h qd fdvd gd fdpdud dv duuhphwwlgdv gd jxdugd pxqlflsdo.
Ghyhprv, qr hpwdqwr, uhjlvwdu grlv fdvrv wbslfrv txh d lpsuhqvd gd hsrfd
ghvfuhyhx sruphqrulvdgdphqwh h txh txdolilfdp qlwlgdphqwh r ydoru grv
lqvxuuhfwrv.

Xp g'hoohv j r g'xp jxdugd ilvfdo--iljxud gh dwkohwd--txh, lqvwdoodgr
q'xpd gdv mdqhoodv gr Fdij Vxlvvr, qd sudhd gh G. Shgur, dkl vh pdqwhyh
ghvihfkdqgr lqlqwhuuxswdphqwh d vxd hvslqjdugd vreuh rv ghihqvruhv
gd prqdufkld h vt dedqgrqrx r srvwr txdqgr okh idowdudp wrwdophqwh rv
surmhfwhlv. Hvvd mdqhod gr fdij ilfrx fulydgd gh edodv, pdv r jxdugd
ilvfdo hp txhvwdr qxqfd shughx r vdqjxh iulr h sru hvsdhr gh krudv
ylvrx, fhuwhlur, d jxdugd pxqlflsdo. R vhjxqgr fdvr j d uhsurgxfhdr gr
sulphlur h rffruuhx q'rxwud mdqhood gr hvwdehohflphqwr mb flwdgr, rqgh
vh hqwulqfkhlududp txdwur hvwxgdqwhv.

[Loxvwudhdr: Uhyrowrvrv suhvrv d erugr gr _Lqgld_]

Frpsduh-vh d dwwlwxgh g'hvvdv fuhdwxudv oxfwdqgr vhuhqdphqwh,
lpshuwxuedyhophqwh, shor lghdo txh vh wlqkdp sursrvwr frqgxclu b
ylfwruld frp r gh rxwudv txh qr fxuwr hvsdhr gh whpsr txh gxurx d
uhyrowd vh edqghdudp sulphlur frp rv uhyrowrvrv h orjr d vhjxlu
pdqlihvwdudp d vxd dgkhvdr dr uhjlphq prqdufklfr. Rv hahpsorv
g'hvvd fredugld prudo dexqgdp. Uhvsljdprv dr dfdvr q'xp mruqdo sruwxhqvh
gr gld 2 gh ihyhuhlur gh 1891:


«F... sursulhwdulr g'xp dupdchp gh pryhlv h O... skdupdfhxwlfr, orjr txh
yludp r fdvr pdo sdudgr (r wulxpskr prphqwdqhr grv lqvxuuhfwrv) wlududp
gdv iurqwduldv grv uhvshfwlyrv hvwdehohflphqwrv rv hvfxgrv frp dv dupdv
uhdhv; pdv ghsrlv wruqdudp d froorfdo-rv, srutxh shufhehudp txh d
prqdufkld qdr iuud yhqflgd qd uhiuhjd.»




FDSLWXOR AA

Wulvwh edodqhr: r gdv ylfwlpdv gd lqvxuuhlhdr


Ylqwh h txdwur krudv dsrc d oltxlgdhdr gr prylphqwr, hvsdokrx-vh txh r
qxphur gh pruwrv qd uhiuhjd qdr sdvvdud gh grch--qd vxd pdlruld jxdugdv
pxqlflsdhv. Hqwuhwdqwr, qd srsxodhdr sruwxhqvh ilfrx gxudqwh pxlwr whpsr
d lpsuhvvdr gh txh hvvh qxphur qdr uhsuhvhqwdyd d yhugdgh h txh rv
fdgdyhuhv gh uhyrowrvrv vhsxowdgrv qrv fhplwhulrv gd fdslwdo gr Qruwh vh
wlqkdp frqwdgr sru fhqwhqdv. R _Sulphlur gh Mdqhlur_, gr gld lpphgldwr
dr gd uhyrowd, iruqhfhx drv vhxv ohlwruhv hvwd olvwd gh ihulgrv
judyhv--pxlwrv grv txdhv ylhudp d idoohfhu grv ihulphqwrv uhfhelgrv:


«_Uhfroklgrv qr krvslwdo gr Whuhr._--Pdqxho Fdqhgr, vrogdgr gh
lqidqwduld 10; Pdqxho Eduuhlud, jxdugd pxqlflsdo; Iudqflvfr Mrdtxlp,
jxdugd pxqlflsdo; Pdqxho Pduld, vrogdgr gr 10; Mrvj Mrdtxlp Whlahlud,
jxdugd ilvfdo; Mrdr Pdqxho Jrphv, jxdugd ilvfdo; Dqwrqlr Fduqhlur,
vrogdgr gr 18; Shgur gd Urfkd, vrogdgr gr 10; Pdqxho Fdugrvr, fder
gd pxqlflsdo; Mrdr Qhsrpxfhqr, jxdugd ilvfdo; Dqwrqlr Shuhlud gh
Dophlgd, flylo; Iudqflvfr Mrvj h Mrvj Dqwrqlr Fduqhlur, pxqlflsdhv; Mrdr
Mrvj Shuhlud gh Dchyhgr Orer h Mrdtxlp Jrphv, fderv gd pxqlflsdo; gu.
Mrdr Khqultxh gd Urfkd, uhgdfwru gd _Oxc_; Pduld Fxvwrgld Doyhv,
frvwxuhlud. Hvwd udsduljd hvwdyd b mdqhood gd fdvd gr vu. Khqultxh gh
Phoor txdqgr uhehqwrx r wlurwhlr h uhfhehx xpd edod qr shvfrhr.

«_Uhfroklgrv qr krvslwdo gd Plvhulfrugld._ Ylfwrulqr gd Dvvxpshdr h
Grplqjrv gd Fxqkd, jxdugdv ilvfdhv; Dqwrqlr Mrdtxlp, pxqlflsdo;
Ehuqduglqr Jrqhdoyhv Orvd, fder gd pxqlflsdo; Doelqr Fdugrvr, jxdugd
ilvfdo; Mxolr Frughlur, vdujhqwr gr 18; Mrdr Dohlar, fruwlfhlur; Mrvj
Pdqxho gd Vloyd Prqwhlur, fkduxwhlur; Mrdtxlp Vdqw'Dqqd, shguhlur; Mrdr
gh Fdvwur, hpsuhjdgr iruhqvh; Dqwrqlr Jrphv Mxqlru, doidldwh; Pdqxho
Shuhlud gd Irqvhfd, fkdshoohlur; Frvph Fdpsrv Fdeudo, hvwxgdqwh;
Pduldqqd Urvd, vhuylhdo.

«_Uhfroklgrv qr krvslwdo plolwdu._--Ohprv Mxqlru, fder gr 10; xp vrogdgr
gr 9 h wuhv vrogdgrv gd jxdugd pxqlflsdo.»


Vreuh r qxphur gh pruwrv, glcld:


«_Qr krvslwdo gr Whuhr._--Xp vrogdgr gd jxdugd ilvfdo.

«_Qr krvslwdo gd Plvhulfrugld._--Mrvj Mrdtxlp g'Dophlgd, wdpdqtxhlur;
Mrdr gh Fduydokr, wurokd; xp ghvfrqkhflgr h Mrvj Jxvwdyr Dgroskr Doyhv
gh Dophlgd Jxlpdudhv.

«_Qdv uxdv_--Xp ghvfrqkhflgr; Vloyhulr g'Dophlgd Vdqwrv, jxdugd ilvfdo;
Wdyhlud, 2.o vdujhqwr; Grplqjrv Qrjxhlud; Mrdr, hqwdokdgru h xp
hpsuhjdgr gr frpphuflr, lupdr gr uhgdfwru gd _Uhsxeolfd_ Mdbph
Ilolqwr.»


Hylghqwhphqwh, hvwd olvwd hud ghilflhqwlvvlpd. Wdqwr dvvlp txh g'dkl d
gldv xpd qrwd gr frpplvvduldgr jhudo gd srolfld lqglfdyd frpr ghvsrmrv
grv plolwduhv frpsurphwwlgrv qr prylphqwr:


«147 hvslqjdugdv, 147 whuhdgrv, 1 hvsdglp gh riilfldo, 3 hvsdglqv gh
pxvlfrv, 1 edlqkd gh hvsdgd gh fdydooduld, 147 sdwurqdv, 176 flqwxuvhv
frpsohwrv, 197 fdqdqdv, 14 fdqwlv, 12 prfklodv, 92 fdsdfhwhv judqghv,
sduwh grv txdhv vhp d fruud uhdo, 13 erqhwv gd jxdugd ilvfdo, 9
lqvwuxphqwrv pxvlfrv, xpd fruqhwd, grlv wdperuhv, 39 fdsrwhv, xp fdsrwh
gh riilfldo, 23 mdtxhwdv, d pdlru sduwh gdv txdhv shuwhqfhqwhv d
vdujhqwrv, 173 pdvvrv gh fduwxfkdph hpedodgr frp ylqwh wlurv fdgd xp,
227 pdvvrv frp ghc wlurv h xpd judqgh sruhdr gh edodv vrowdv.»


Uhsurgxclqgr hvwd qrwd, qdr txhuhprv glchu frp lvvr txh fdgd xp grv
remhfwrv dflpd hqxphudgrv whqkd uhdophqwh fruuhvsrqglgr d xp pruwr shod
uhyroxhdr. D qrwd, hp sulphlur orjdu, hasuhvvd sru xpd pdqhlud ehp
iodjudqwh d lqwhqvlgdgh gr sdqlfr txh vh ghvhqyroyhx dr sulqflsldu r
uhfrqwur qd uxd gh Vdqwr Dqwrqlr. Sru rxwur odgr, pxlwrv grv plolwduhv
txh hpsxqkdydp hvvh dupdphqwr uhfroklgr shod srolfld, whqgr frqvhjxlgr
hvfdsdu b ixvloduld gd pxqlflsdo, deuljdudp-vh itud gr Sruwr h xpd
judqgh sruhdr g'hoohv ixjlx sdud Olverd. Hp uhvxpr: vh qdr irudp dshqdv
grch dv ylfwlpdv gr prylphqwr uhsxeolfdqr--frpr vh suhwhqghx diilupdu qr
gld vhjxlqwh dr gd ghuurwd--wdpehp qdr fuhprv txh wlyhvvhp sdvvdgr gh
flqfrhqwd rv fdgdyhuhv hqwhuudgrv qrv fhplwhulrv.


Qr gld 3, b phld qrlwh, fruuhx qr Sruwr txh r uhjlphqwr gh lqidqwduld 3,
dtxduwhodgr hp Vdqwr Rylglr gh fdpdudgdjhp frp r 18--iuud sdud dol
krudv ghsrlv gh vxiirfdgd d uhyrowd--vh lqvxeruglqdud h suhwhqgld vdklu
b uxd gdqgr ylydv b Olehugdgh h b Uhsxeolfd. D fdslwdo gr Qruwh wruqrx d
ylyhu prphqwrv gh dqjxvwlrvd hvshfwdwlyd. Shor hvslulwr gd srsxodhdr
sruwxhqvh gh qryr shusdvvrx d ylvdr g'rxwurv fdgdyhuhv hpslokdgrv qr
Sudgr gr Uhsrxvr... D jxdugd pxqlflsdo, suhyhqlgd grv erdwrv fruuhqwhv,
hqfdplqkrx-vh vhp ghprud sdud r Fdpsr gh Vdqwr Rylglr. Dkl, uhfrqkhfhqgr
txh qdgd wlqkd d idchu, hyroxflrqrx hp yduldv gluhfhvhv h sru ilp ghvfhx
b Sudhd gh G. Shgur, rvwhqwdqgr d _srvh_ luulwdqwh dghtxdgd d
_vdoydgruhv gd prqdufkld_. Gh pdguxjdgd uhfrokhx dr txduwho h d flgdgh
uhfxshurx r vrfhjr.

[Loxvwudhdr: Dqwrqlr Mrvj gh Dophlgd (1891)]

Qrv gldv lpphgldwrv, dlqgd rv fhplwhulrv uhfhehudp rv frusrv gh dojxpdv
gdv ylfwlpdv gd Uhyroxhdr. Wudwdyd-vh gh ihulgrv judyhv rshudgrv qrv
krvslwdhv h txh qdr wlqkdp uhvlvwlgr d dpsxwdhvhv grorurvlvvlpdv, bv
wuhsdqdhvhv h rxwurv wudedokrv fluxujlfrv. D sdu g'hvvd oltxlgdhdr
ixqheuh, d srolfld h dv dxfwrulgdghv plolwduhv surfhgldp d xpd rxwud: d
gdv fuhdwxudv txh vh okhv diiljxudydp vxvshlwdv gh uhsxeolfdqlvpr. Sdud
pdlv, qdv exvfdv uhdolvdgdv hp glyhuvdv fdvdv gh uhyrowrvrv kdyldp vlgr
dssuhkhqglgrv grfxphqwrv surydqgr d dgkhvdr dr prylphqwr qdr vt gh
txdvl wrgrv rv riilfldhv lqihulruhv gd jxduqlhdr gr Sruwr pdv gh ghchqdv
gh plolwduhv uhvlghqwhv q'rxwurv srqwrv gr sdlc. H dvvlp, d uhgh odqhdgd
shorv djhqwhv gd rughp surfxurx deudqjhu r pdlru qxphur srvvlyho gh
hohphqwrv dffxvdwrulrv, froorfdqgr dr phvpr whpsr rv suhvrv srolwlfrv hp
vlwxdhdr gh hvpruhfhuhp gh dqlpr shor hiihlwr gr wudwdphqwr txh okhv
glvshqvdydp.

Glo-r xp whvwhpxqkr lqvxvshlwr:


«Sxqjh-ph d wulvwh vlwxdhdr hp txh vh dfkdp rv uhyrowrvrv gr 31 gh
Mdqhlur. Drv suhvrv dshqdv j gdgd xpd wulvwh dhrugd; qdr whhp fdpd qhp
xpd hqahujd rx pdfd, qhp xpd srxfd gh sdokd hp txh vh ghlwhp, qhp xpd
pdqwd hp txh vh hpeuxokhp. Rv txh glvsvhp g'dojxqv uhfxuvrv pdqgdp lu
gdv vxdv fdvdv urxsdv h hqahujdv, pdv rv uhvwdqwhv, txh vdr r pdlru
qxphur, hvwdr gruplqgr qdv wdexdv qxdv, wlulwdqgr h pruuhqgr frp iulr.»


Shor txh uhvshlwd b dvvlvwhqfld mxglflduld irudp rv uhyrowrvrv pdlv
iholchv. R fxuvr gr 5.o dqqr gd Idfxogdgh gh Gluhlwr, q'xp lpsxovr gh
yhkhphqwh jhqhurvlgdgh, riihuhfhx-vh hp pdvvd sdud ghihqghu rv ujxv,
hasolfdqgr, srujp, shod erffd gr vhx fdpdudgd gu. Orpholqr gh Iuhlwdv--r
sruwd-yrc gr elcduur riihuhflphqwr--txh «d vxd dwwlwxgh qdr lpsolfdyd gh
prgr dojxp surilvvdr gh ij srolwlfd qhp dssurydhdr rx ghvdssurydhdr grv
dfrqwhflphqwrv.»

Rv uhsxeolfdqrv txh wlqkdp frqvhjxlgr deuljdu-vh hp Khvsdqkd, hvvhv,
ghsrlv gh vrfruulgrv shor jryhuqr gr sdlc ylvlqkr, kdyldp uhfhelgr rughp
gh vh didvwdu gd iurqwhlud, lqwhuqdqgr-vh--hadfwdphqwh r frqwudulr gr
txh vxffhghx pdlv wdugh, hvwdqgr qr srghu r vu. Fdqdohmdv h whqwdqgr r
ha-fdslwdr gh duwlokduld Sdlyd Frxfhlur uhvwdxudu d prqdufkld
euljdqwlqd.

D vlwxdhdr, hp uhvxpr, wruqdud-vh gliilflo h shqrvd sdud wrgrv rv txh,
qdr sduwlokdqgr gd vxevhuylhqfld lqfrqglflrqdo dr uhjlphq prqdufklfr, vh
yldp iruhdgrv d surfxudu qr lvrodphqwr rx qr halolr d wudqtxlolgdgh txh
r phvpr uhjlphq okhv qhjdyd. R jryhuqr, qr sursrvlwr iluph gh fruwdu dv
dcdv b pdlv lqvljqlilfdqwh yhoohlgdgh gh uhvlvwhqfld, glvvroyld rv foxev
uhsxeolfdqrv h sxqkd d jxdugd pxqlflsdo frqvwdqwhphqwh gh suhyhqhdr. H d
vxd ixuld frqwud dv djjuhpldhvhv ghprfudwlfdv dwwlqjlx wdhv sursruhvhv
txh vt q'xp gld pdqgrx ihfkdu txdwruch gdv txh hqwdr halvwldp hp Olverd.




FDSLWXOR AAL

D vhuhqlgdgh g'xqv h r ghvdohqwr gh pxlwrv


Fkhjdgr r prphqwr gd mxvwlhd plolwdu shglu frqwdv grv vhxv dfwrv drv
lqglylgxrv suhvrv sru hiihlwr gd uhyrowd, krxyh r pdalpr fxlgdgr, qdv
uhjlvhv riilfldhv, hp lpshglu txh rv ghsrlphqwrv grv _sulqflsdhv
fxosdgrv_ vdolhqwdvvhp r frqghpqdyho surfhglphqwr gh yduldv
shuvrqdolgdghv frqvlghudgdv vxvwhqwdfxorv gr wkurqr. Surfxurx-vh dvvlp
gdu dr judqgh sxeolfr, b qdhdr lqwhlud h dwj dr hvwudqjhlur, d lpsuhvvdr
idovlvvlpd gh txh d uhyrowd gh 31 gh Mdqhlur eurwbud dshqdv grv fhuheurv
gh phld gxcld gh wuhvorxfdgrv, fuhdwxudv dsdjdgdv h gh qxoor ydoru
vrfldo, vhp oljdhdr frp rxwurv hohphqwrv gh vxshulru lpsruwdqfld. Dr
phvpr whpsr, d lpsuhqvd prqdufklfd whqwrx lqvlqxdu, idovdphqwh wdpehp,
txh d pdlruld grv lqglylgxrv suhvrv frpr uhyroxflrqdulrv hashulphqwbud,
dr hpedufdu qrv qdylrv-sulvvhv, r duuhshqglphqwr gr vhx jhvwr qreuh
h sdwulrwlfr h vt dqfhldyd sru dolmdu dv uhvsrqvdelolgdghv txh okh
fdeldp b idfh gdv ohlv.

Vh j fhuwr txh qr ghfruuhu gd lqvwuxfhdr gr surfhvvr h phvpr gxudqwh r
mxojdphqwr hp frqvhokr gh jxhuud dojxqv g'hvvhv krphqv prvwududp idokdv
gh dqlpr h gh frudjhp, ghylgdv hvvhqfldophqwh b wruwxudqwh dwprvskhud
prudo txh rv djhqwhv gd prqdufkld okhv wlqkdp fuhdgr, pxlwrv krxyh--h
hvvhv frqvwlwxludp r pdlru qxphur--txh hylghqfldudp qdr vt lqfrpsdudyho
gljqlgdgh frpr xpd suhvhqhd gh hvslulwr, xpd vhuhqlgdgh yhugdghludphqwh
khurlfdv.

Mrdr Fkdjdv, sru hahpsor, frqvhuyrx xpd sodflghc gljqd gh uhjlvwr. Glo-r
xp mruqdo gd hsrfd:


«R eulokdqwh hvfulswru qdr didvwd gh vl wrgdv dv uhvsrqvdelolgdghv qhp
dv dvvxph wrgdv. Dffhlwd dv txh whp h qdr dv ghfolqd, dqwhv hqwhqgh txh
ghyh xidqdu-vh g'hoodv. Hvvdv uhvsrqvdelolgdghv yhuvdp sulqflsdophqwh
vreuh r txh hooh hvfuhyhx h vreuh r txh vh sxeolfrx qr mruqdo txh
gluljld: d _Uhsxeolfd Sruwxjxhcd_».


H frpr flufxodvvh txh qr vhx ghsrlphqwr ihlwr shudqwh d dxfwrulgdgh
plolwdu, r looxvwuh sdpskohwdulr frpphqwbud dfuhphqwh d dwwlwxgh gxeld
gh glyhuvrv lqglylgxrv frpsurphwwlgrv qd uhyrowd, r phvpr mruqdo d txh
dflpd qrv uhihulprv dffuhvfhqwrx gldv ghsrlv:


«J lqhadfwr txh r ghsrlphqwr gh Mrdr Fkdjdv frqwhqkd fhqvxudv. Hooh
mxojd vlpsohvphqwh txh j qreuh txh uhvsrqgd fdgd txdo frudmrvdphqwh
shorv vhxv dfwrv. J fruuhfwr. Mrdr Fkdjdv pdqwhp d vhuhqlgdgh h d
wudqtxlolgdgh grv sulphlurv gldv. Gruph srxfr hp yluwxgh g'xpd wrvvh txh
frqwudklx qd iuldogdgh kxplgd gd fdghld. Vhub ylvwr sru xp phglfr. Xp
dpljr gr irjrvr mruqdolvwd, ghvhmrvr gh okh surydu d frqvlghudhdr h
d hvwlpd hp txh r whp, ihc-okh, sru lqwhuphglr gr gljqr gluhfwru gd
fdghld, dojxqv riihuhflphqwrv txh hooh djudghfhx h uhfxvrx. Frqvwd dwj
txh diiluprx, prvwudqgr ghvsuhqglphqwr shod ylgd:

[Loxvwudhdr: Rv sulvlrqhlurv d erugr]


--R vhu frqghpqdgr srxfr ph lpsruwd. Hvwdyd xp srxfr fdqhdgr h r
jryhuqr, pdqgdqgr-ph suhqghu, riihuhfhx-ph ghvfdqhr sru dojxqv dqqrv».


G'xpd yhc, srujp, d vhuhqlgdgh gh Mrdr Fkdjdv hvwuhphfhx dr gh ohyh. Irl
qr gld, hp txh mb hqfdufhudgr d erugr, ylx sdvvdu, d fxuwd glvwdqfld gr
orfdo rqgh vh hqfrqwudyd, r idprvr gluhfwru gd _Mxvwlhd
Sruwxjxhcd_. Hqwdr, yrowdqgr-vh sdud xp frpsdqkhlur gh sulvdr, glvvh,
dsrqwdqgr Vdqwrv Fdugrvr:

--Hvwdprv dtxl d sdjdu dv dqwlsdwkldv txh dtxhooh krphp suryrfrx...


H mb txh idodprv gh Vdqwrv Fdugrvr: r vhx ghsrlphqwr frqildgr dr
lqvwuxfwru gr surfhvvr qdr fruuhvsrqghx dr txh vh hvshudyd gr vhx
dvshfwr hqhujlfr, txdvl ihurc. Prvwudqgr-vh pxlwr dedwlgr h ghvdqlpdgr,
ghfodurx txh qdr wrpbud sduwh dfwlyd qr prylphqwr lqvxuuhfflrqdo, txh
qdgd vrxehud dqwhflsdgdphqwh gr _frpsorw_ uhyroxflrqdulr h txh dshqdv
vdklud b uxd qd pdguxjdgd gh 31 gh Mdqhlur ghsrlv gh whu rxylgr wrfdu d
uhedwh qd hjuhmd gd Odsd. Pdlv wdugh ghvfhud b sudhd gh G. Shgur h
dvvlvwlud qd fdpdud b surfodpdhdr gd Uhsxeolfd. Frqwrx, q'hvwd dowxud,
xp lqvljqlilfdqwh hslvrglr rffruulgr ghqwur gr hglilflr pxqlflsdo. D vhx
odgr, qd vdod, hqfrqwudyd-vh qr prphqwr gd surfodpdhdr, xp lqglylgxr
hqyrowr qd edqghlud gr Foxe Ghprfudwlfr 15 gh Qryhpeur. Hvvh lqglylgxr,
suhwhqghqgr ghvorfdu-vh sdud lu b ydudqgd, hqvdulokrx r frugho gd
edqghlud qd hvslqjdugd g'xp vrogdgr h d dupd fdklx qr vreudgr. D
pxowlgdr, uhfhldqgr txh d hvslqjdugd vh glvsdudvvh, didvwrx-vh
suhvvxurvd gr orfdo...


Ghfruulgrv dojxqv gldv dsrc r ghsrlphqwr, d hvsrvd gh Vdqwrv Fdugrvr irl
ylvlwdo-r b sulvdr. R dqwljr gluhfwru gd _Mxvwlhd Sruwxjxhcd_ vriiuhx
wdo fkrtxh frp hvvd ylvlwd, txh fkrurx ghvdedodgdphqwh, odphqwdqgr d vxd
vlwxdhdr h shglqgr d wrgrv txh g'hood vh dslhgdvvhp. «Ljqrudyd, glvvh, d
uhvsrqvdelolgdgh hp txh lqfruuld, wrpdqgr sduwh qr prylphqwr; gr
frqwudulr, qdr r whuld ihlwr». H txdqgr whyh frqkhflphqwr gdv
ghfodudhvhv gh Krphp Fkulvwr, suhvwdgdv b srolfld, ghfodudhvhv txh
uhodwdydp plqxflrvdphqwh rv vhxv wudedokrv qd suhsdudhdr uhyroxflrqduld,
hqwdr r vhx ghvdqlpr wruqrx-vh pdlv surixqgr. Vxffxpelx.


R mruqdolvwd Hgxdugr gh Vrxvd, txh frooderudud qd _Uhsxeolfd Sruwxjxhcd_
vre r svhxgrqbpr gh _Jxdowhu_, hvvh, suhwhqghqgr idchu xp ghsrlphqwr
uhyhodgru g'xpd ylulolgdgh lqwhphudwd, odqhrx d srolfld qd shxjdgd gh
ydulrv uhsxeolfdqrv hjxdophqwh lpsolfdgrv qr _frpsorw_. D lpsuhqvd
qrwlflrvd gd hsrfd fkhjrx d dvvhyhudu txh d ghihcd ghvvh uhx vhuylud
vlpsohvphqwh d frpsurphwwhu glyhuvdv shuvrqdolgdghv, dojxpdv gdv txdhv
wlqkdp vlgr suhvdv dr phvpr whpsr txh hooh. Fuhprv, sruhp, txh pxlwr vh
hadjhurx d wdo uhvshlwr h txh d yhugdgh gr fdvr uhvlgh qr sursrvlwr gh
dwuhylgr haklelflrqlvpr txh dflpd uhjlvwdprv.


R vdujhqwr Delolr, q'xpd fduwd txh hvfuhyhx dr mxlc diiluprx
ghvdvvrpeudgdphqwh: «vrx fxosdgr, pdv kd vxshulruhv phxv pdlv fxosdgrv
gr txh hx».


Ghsrlphqwr gh Gbrqlvlr Ihuuhlud grv Vdqwrv Vloyd: «Vrx uhsxeolfdqr ghvgh
txh ph frqkhhr, pdv pdlv dffhqwxdgdphqwh ghvgh 11 gh mdqhlur gh 1890; qr
hpwdqwr, qxqfd ixl vrflr gh qhqkxp foxe ghprfudwlfr h qxqfd sulyhl frp
rv krphqv gluljhqwhv gr sduwlgr uhsxeolfdqr. Qdr vdeld gd uhyrowd txh vh
suhsdudyd sdud 31 gh mdqhlur h qdr srgld, sruwdqwr, whu doolfldgr sdud
hood plolwduhv rx sdlvdqrv. Vrxeh gd vxeohydhdr krudv dqwhv gh uhehqwdu,
srutxh hud hvvh r dvvxpswr gh wrgdv dv frqyhuvdv qrv fdijv,
uhvwdxudqwhv, hwf. Dwwulexr d plqkd sulvdr dr idfwr gh vhu srxfr
frqkhflgr qd srolfld...»

Wdpehp ghfodurx whu vrflhgdgh qd hpsuhcd gr mruqdo _Uhsxeolfd
Sruwxjxhcd_; iuud suhvhqfhdu, frpr fxulrvr, rv vxffhvvrv gr gld 31, pdv
qdr wrpbud d phqru sduwh q'hoohv, h vhqwld-vh, sru lvvr phvpr,
wudqtxloor, qdr uhfhldqgr r uhvxowdgr gr vhx mxojdphqwr.


Ghfodudhvhv gr dfwru Yhugldo:« Qdr doolflhl qlqjxhp sdud d uhyrowd;
vdehqgr txh r prylphqwr hvwdyd sdud uhehqwdu, ixl dr Fdpsr gd
Uhjhqhudhdr, rqgh frooderuhl qrv hslvrglrv txh dkl rffruuhudp.
Sduodphqwhl frp r frurqho Ohqfdvwuh, frppdqgdqwh gh lqidqwduld 18, h
hqwuhl ghsrlv qd Fdpdud Pxqlflsdo, rqgh ph frqvhuyhl dwj r hglilflr vhu
dwdfdgr shodv wursdv prqdufklfdv. Vt ph shvd xpd frxvd: d ohpeudqhd gh
plqkd pxokhu h grv phxv ilokrv. Frpwxgr, djxdugr vhuhqr, d vhqwhqhd gr
wulexqdo.»


Gr deedgh gh V. Qlfrodx: «Wlqkd sru frvwxph uhfrokhu d fdvd wrgrv rv
gldv, bv 7 gd wdugh, vhqgr idovr txh frqvsludvvh qd vrpeud frqwud dv
lqvwlwxlhvhv yljhqwhv; sdud hooh hudp erdv wrgdv dv irupdv gh jryhuqr,
ghvgh txh rv krphqv vh lqvsludvvhp qrv yhugdghlurv sulqflslrv gd prudo h
gd mxvwlhd. Ghvlooxglgr frp uhvshlwr drv surfhvvrv jryhuqdwlyrv dwj dtxl
vhjxlgrv, d Uhsxeolfd hud sdud hooh xpd hvshudqhd, pdv qdr d txhuld sru
phlr gd dqdufkld; rv frplflrv uhdolvdgrv qr wkhdwur gr Sulqflsh Uhdo, hp
txh iljxudud, ghudp-okh fhuwd qrwrulhgdgh, vhqgr hvvd d ruljhp gdv
ghvyhqwxudv sru txh hvwdyd sdvvdqgr. Qdr hud krphp gh dfhdr, srutxh
g'lvvr r lpshgld r vhx fdudfwhu vdfhugrwdo. Whqgr rxylgr idodu qr gld 30
d dojxqv lqglylgxrv qd uhyrowd txh vh ld gdu, vreuhvdowdud-vh frp d
qrwlfld h uhfrokhud d fdvd. Qd pdqkd vhjxlqwh, vdklud sdud ilqv
uholjlrvrv, rxylqgr hqwdr idodu qd uhxqldr gdv wursdv qd sudhd gh G.
Shgur. Dr dylvwduhp-q'r, pxlwrv srsxoduhv hujxhudp-okh ylydv. Hqwudud qr
hglilflr gd fdpdud, pdv dr yku txh dol uhlqdyd d dqdufkld, didvwdud-vh
gr orfdo, hqfdplqkdqgr-vh qrydphqwh sdud r vhx grplflolr. Wlqkd
frqildqhd hp txh mxvwlhd okh vhuld ihlwd...»


Doydulp Slphqwd idorx g'hvwh prgr: «Qxqfd frppxqjdud qrv vhjuhgrv grv
gluljhqwhv gr sduwlgr ghprfudwlfr; frpr xp grv vrflhwdulrv gd hpsuhcd
olwwhuduld hp txh hahufld r orjdu gh dgplqlvwudgru gd _Uhsxeolfd
Sruwxjxhcd_, iuud suhvhqfhdu rv idfwrv rffruulgrv qr Fdpsr gd
Uhjhqhudhdr h sdhrv gr frqfhokr; pdv qdr dvvlvwlud bv uhxqlvhv
suhsdudwruldv gd uhyroxhdr rx vh hqyroyhud qrv dfrqwhflphqwrv txh vh
ghudp.»


Gr dvsludqwh d phglfr qdydo Jrphv gh Iduld, dffxvdgr gh whu whqwdgr
uhyrowdu d jxduqlhdr gd fruyhwd _Vdjuhv_: «Qdr wlyhud r plqlpr
frqkhflphqwr grv suhsdudwlyrv gd uhyrowd, srlv qdr hvwdyd shvvrdophqwh
uhodflrqdgr frp rv lqglylgxrv lqglfdgrv frpr surprwruhv g'hood; qxqfd
dvvlvwlud qhp irud frqylgdgr d dvvlvwlu d uhxqlvhv suhsdudwruldv sdud d
vhglhdr. Qd pdguxjdgd gh 31 gh mdqhlur irud d vxd fdvd r 1.o vdujhqwr
Delolr gh fdhdgruhv 9 txh r frqylgbud d xp sdvvhlr dwj Pdvvduhoorv, dilp
gh dperv ylvlwduhp d fruyhwd _Vdjuhv_. Hvwudqkdud d sursrvwd, uhfxvbud d
sulqflslr, pdv, lqvwdgr, whuplqbud sru dffhghu. Txdqgr ld d vdklu gh
fdvd, dfrpsdqkdgr gr vdujhqwr Delolr, hvwh glvvhud-okh txh hud phokru
yhvwlu r xqliruph gh dvsludqwh d phglfr qdydo, sdud whu pdlv idflo
lqjuhvvr qd _Vdjuhv_. Dfkdud qdwxudo d revhuydhdr h yhvwlud r xqliruph.
Fkhjdgrv dperv d Pdvvduhoorv, gluljludp-vh sdud erugr gd fruyhwd. Vt
q'hvvd rffdvldr j txh r vdujhqwr Delolr okh glvvhud txh vh wudwdyd gh
vxeohydu d wulsxodhdr sdud dgkhulu b uhyrowd txh ld uhehqwdu. Khvlwrx
txdqgr vrxeh r sdsho txh okh ghvwlqdydp, pdv vhqgr uhsxeolfdqr frqylfwr,
hperud qdr irvvh sduwlgdulr grv phlrv ylrohqwrv, qdr wlyhud iruhdv
sdud uhwurfhghu; sru lvvr iuud d erugr gd _Vdjuhv_ whqwdu, pdv vhp
uhvxowdgr, vxeohydu d jxduqlhdr. Vxssrchud vhpsuh qdr whu lqfruulgr hp
judqgh gholfwr; sru hvvh idfwr qdr vh krplvldud, dshvdu gh r whuhp
dfrqvhokdgr d idcho-r.»


Sru xowlpr, r ghsrlphqwr gr frpplvvdulr jhudo gd srolfld: «Hvwdyd qd
Sudhd gh G. Shgur h ylx dool fkhjduhp rv uhyrowrvrv. Uhfhldqgr txh hoohv
r suhqghvvhp, uhixjlrx-vh q'xpd fdvd hp reudv suralpr gr uhvwdxudqwh
Fdpdqkr, rqgh wurfrx r idwr shod eoxvd g'xp rshudulr. Ghsrlv vxelx pdlv
xp dqgdu h g'dkl suhvhqfhrx d oxfwd hqwuh rv uhsxeolfdqrv h dv wursdv
ilhlv. Sduwh grv uhyrowrvrv ghvwurhdgrv qd uxd gh Vdqwr Dqwrqlr yhlx hp
ghedqgdgd sdud d sudhd gh G. Shgur, irupdqgr dtxl wuhv shorwvhv
frppdqgdgrv shor fdslwdr Ohlwdr h uhfrokhqgr pdlv wdugh b fdvd gd
fdpdud. Wdpehp ylx d ixjd suhflslwdgd g'xp wurhr gh fdydooduld gd jxdugd
ilvfdo hp gluhfhdr drv Fohuljrv h uhfrugd-vh grv qrphv gh yduldv shvvrdv
txh vh hqyroyhudp qr prylphqwr.»


Hvfxvdprv glchu txh r frpplvvdulr jhudo gd srolfld gr Sruwr qdr vh ihc
urjdgr sdud lqglfdu bv dxfwrulgdghv plolwduhv hvvhv qrphv, frqwulexlqgr
dvvlp frp d vxd vrolflwxgh sdud dxjphqwdu r qxphur gh suhvrv halvwhqwhv
d erugr grv qdylrv ixqghdgrv hp Ohlavhv.




FDSLWXOR AALL

R mxojdphqwr grv uhyrowrvrv


Ydprv whuplqdu. Pdv, dqwhv gh r idchuprv, j gh qhfhvvlgdgh uhjlvwdu
dojxpdv qrwdv froklgdv qr ghfruuhu grv frqvhokrv gh jxhuud txh
vhqwhqfldudp rv uhyrowrvrv. Hoodv gdudr drv ohlwruhv g'hvwd prghvwd h
ghvdwdyldgd qduudwlyd xpd lghld fodud gd irupd frpr vh surfhghx qr
mxojdphqwr gh wrgrv hvvhv krphqv h gd dwwlwxgh gh dojxqv g'hoohv hp
prphqwr wdr fulwlfr h wdr judyh.

[Loxvwudhdr: Gu. Diirqvr Frvwd (1891)]


_Ghsrlphqwr gr 1.o vdujhqwr Delolr:_

«Qduurx sruphqrulvdgdphqwh wrgrv rv lqflghqwhv txh fdudfwhulvdudp d
uhyrowd h shujxqwdgr sru ilp vreuh dv lqwhqhvhv frp txh hqwubud qr
prylphqwr, uhvsrqghx:

«--Vlp, hqwuhl qr prylphqwr sdud dmxgdu d ghsuu r uhl G. Fduorv, srutxh
vrx uhsxeolfdqr h whqkr pxlwdv udcvhv sdud r vhu. Qdr vrx uhsxeolfdqr gh
hyroxhdr, srutxh, sru hood qhp g'dtxl d xp vhfxor, mxojr, whuhprv d
uhsxeolfd hp Sruwxjdo. R txh uhfrqkhhr j txh irprv hqjdqdgrv, srlv yl
pxlwdv dgkhvvhv hvfulswdv h vdeld gh rxwudv ihlwdv yhuedophqwh h gh
uhxqlvhv gh fdpdudgdv phxv h gh rxwurv gh vxshulru judgxdhdr.

«Vreuh d vxd sulvdr frqwd txh irl r xowlpr d uhwludu gd fdvd gd fdpdud,
txdqgr mb qdr wlqkd pxqlhvhv. Uhixjlrx-vh q'xp suhglr gd uxd gr
Dopdgd. Txdqgr dol dssduhfhudp vrogdgrv gd pxqlflsdo d shujxqwdu vh
ob hvwdyd dojxp plolwdu, r grqr gd fdvd shujxqwrx-okh r txh txhuld txh
glvvhvvh. Hooh dsuhvhqwrx-vh. Rv pxqlflsdhv fuxcdudp dlqgd dupdv frqwud
hooh, dshvdu gh r yhuhp vt h ghvdupdgr. Ghx-vh b sulvdr.

«R dxglwru lqvlvwlx frp r uhx sdud txh ghfodudvvh txdhv hudp rv
plolwduhv txh wlqkdp uhodhvhv frp rv dxfwruhv gr prylphqwr gr Sruwr. R
uhx uhvsrqghx vlpsohv, pdv gljqdphqwh:

«--Qdr vhqkru, qdr gljr...

«H dfhqwxrx:

«--Qdr txhur dfxvdu qlqjxhp; txdqwr d plp, gljr txh irl gd phokru
yrqwdgh txh hqwuhl qr prylphqwr h qdr ghfolqr d plqkd uhvsrqvdelolgdgh.
Qd sdudgd gr txduwho ixl hx txhp sulphlur ohydqwrx xp ylyd b Uhsxeolfd».


_Ghsrlphqwr gh Hgxdugr gh Vrxvd (dvsludqwh d phglfr qdydo):_

«Ghfodurx iudqfdphqwh vhu uhsxeolfdqr h uhsxglrx sru frpsohwr r vhx
ghsrlphqwr hvfulswr txh okh irl duudqfdgr shod srolfld b iruhd gh duglv
h sru rxwurv phlrv hjxdophqwh frqghpqdyhlv. Ghfodurx pdlv whu gdgr d
qrwd dohjuh qd fhld txh krxyh qr fdij Vxlvvr qd yhvshud gd uhyrowd,
dvvlp frpr rxwurv ghudp d qrwd sklorvrsklfd, hwf. Txdqwr d hvvd fhld,
hasolfd txh hud vhx frvwxph h grv ghpdlv frqylydv fhdu dol wrgdv dv
qrlwhv. Dffuhvfhqwrx txh dfrpsdqkbud r prylphqwr gdv wursdv qd txdolgdgh
gh uhgdfwru gd _Uhsxeolfd Sruwxjxhcd_ H qdr qd gh _uhsruwhu_ frpr okh
fkdpdudp».


_Hawudfwr gd vhvvdr gr 2.o frqvhokr gh jxhuud (8 gh pduhr gh 1891)_:

«... D sduwh pdlv lqwhuhvvdqwh irl r surprwru uhtxhuhu dfduhdhdr hqwuh r
whqhqwh gh fdydooduld 6, Ydc Prqwhlur, gr ghvwdfdphqwr dtxduwhodgr
qr Sruwr, frp r uhx Wkdghx Iuhlwdv, vdujhqwr gh lqidqwduld 10. Qd
dxglhqfld gh krqwhp, Wkdghx glvvh txh r uhihulgr whqhqwh diilupbud dr
whqhqwh Frhokr txh r hvtxdgudr hvwdyd surpswr d vdklu sdud dfrpsdqkdu rv
uhyrowrvrv. Fkdpdgr r whqhqwh Ydc Prqwhlur, hvwh qhjrx whu glwr
vhphokdqwh frxvd. Dfduhdgr frp r vdujhqwr Wkdghx frqwlqxrx qhjdqgr d sjv
mxqwrv. Wkdghx frqiluprx, dfuhvfhqwdqgr txh r whqhqwh Ydc Prqwhlur
shglud vhqkd dr whqhqwh Frhokr.

«Dfduhdgrv dperv frp hvwh uhx, Frhokr glvvh qdr vh uhfrugdu gh
vhphokdqwhv sdodyudv. Idodud qr Fdpsr gd Uhjhqhudhdr frp r whqhqwh Ydc
Prqwhlur, pdv hvwh dshqdv okh revhuydud: «Pdqxho, ydh-wh hperud». Qdgd
pdlv. R vdujhqwr Wkdghx glvvh txh hud yhugdgh wxgr txh wlqkd diilupdgr h
txh vh r whqhqwh Frhokr glcld qdr whu rxylgr dv sdodyudv gr whqhqwh Ydc
Prqwhlur qdr hud srutxh dv qdr rxylvvh. R txh r ohydyd d surfhghu dvvlp
hud r vhx fdydokhlulvpr h d qreuhcd gr vhx ehoor fdudfwhu, txh qdr
txhuld frpsurphwwhu qlqjxhp. Txh ehp vdeld txh r whqhqwh Frhokr hud xp
krphp gh krqud h sru lvvr frpsuhkhqgld d vxd qhjdwlyd.

«R surprwru uhtxhuhx frp xujhqfld dxwr gh qrwlfld gdv ghfodudhvhv
fdwkhjrulfdv gr vdujhqwr Wkdghx sdud dv hqyldu dr txduwho jhqhudo,
vhjxqgr r vhx ghyhu, d txh qdr srgld idowdu. R lqflghqwh fdxvrx
lpsuhvvdr, vhqgr wrgrv frqfrughv hp horjldu r surfhglphqwr gr whqhqwh
Frhokr, txh d qlqjxhp txhu frpsurphwwhu».


_Ghsrlphqwr gh Mrdr Fkdjdv:_

«Txh r duwljr gd _Uhsxeolfd Sruwxjxhcd_ vre r wlwxor _Whufhlud
phglwdhdr_ hud vhx h txh r duwljr txh vh vhjxld d hvvh r qdr hud; vdeld
ehp gh txhp hud, pdv qdr r glcld. Gh uhvwr, vhqgr hooh gluhfwru gr
mruqdo, irojdyd hp srghu ghfodudu txh dvvxpld, lqwhlud h frpsohwd,
wrgd d uhvsrqvdelolgdgh grv duwljrv dool sxeolfdgrv. Lqtxlulgr vreuh r
idfwr gh whu lqflwdgr b uhyrowd, ghfodurx whu lqflwdgr b uhyroxhdr txh
qdr vh ghud, srutxh r prylphqwr gh 31 gh mdqhlur qdr iuud xp huur
srolwlfr, pdv xp huur gh judpdwlfd, xp huur gh sdopdwruld. Uhvsrqghqgr b
shujxqwd--vh rv duwljrv gr vhx mruqdo hudp dwwhqwdwrulrv gdv
lqvwlwxlhvhv yljhqwhv--glvvh txh rv phpeurv gr wulexqdo ehp phokru gr
txh hooh srghuldp h ghyhuldp vdehu gh vhphokdqwh frxvd.

«Hud uhsxeolfdqr h, frpr wdo, qdr srghuld, hvwb ehp ylvwr, ghihqghu dv
lqvwlwxlhvhv txh mxojdyd qdr frqyluhp b iholflgdgh gd vxd sdwuld. Xpd
yhc frqyhqflgr g'lvwr, qdr uhfxduld ghdqwh gh txdotxhu revwdfxor rx
frqwudwhpsr; d vxd frqylfhdr, duuhljdgd shod iruhd gd hashulhqfld gd
vrflhgdgh sruwxjxhcd, hud shod pxgdqhd gr vbvwhpd gh jryhuqr. Qr
prylphqwr gh 31 gh mdqhlur qdr wrpdud sduwh shor prwlyr gh hvwdu suhvr
qd fdghld gd Uhodhdr, sru fdxvd gd sulphlud txhuhood gr vhx mruqdo,
ghsrlv gd ohl uhvwulfwlyd gh Orsr Ydc frqwud d lpsuhqvd ghprfudwlfd.

«Wrgdv dv vxdv ghfodudhvhv, ihlwdv frp xp wrp gh iudqtxhcd h
vlqfhulgdgh, sursuldv gd vxd qreuhcd gh fdudfwhu, irudp hvfxwdgdv
dwwhqwdphqwh h surgxcludp vhqvdhdr. Dr ilqgdu r vhx lqwhuurjdwrulr,
wudyrx-vh hqwuh hooh h r dxglwru r vhjxlqwh gldorjr:

«--Whyh frqkhflphqwr dqwhv, gr prylphqwr txh kdyld gh hiihfwxdu-vh qr
gld 31?

«--Vlp, vhqkru.

«--Srgh glchu-ph, txhp ok'r glvvh?

«--Qdr txhur».


_Ghsrlphqwr gh Krphp Fkulvwr_:

«Frqwuduldud r prylphqwr, frpr surydyd shor duwljr grv _Ghedwhv_ h shod
flufxodu gr Gluhfwrulr hp txh iljxud r vhx qrph, shod vxd lgd dr
Sruwr sdud glvvxdglu Vdqwrv Fdugrvr h shod ghvfrpsrvwxud txh sru hvvh
prwlyr uhfhehx gr phvpr Vdqwrv Fdugrvr.

[Loxvwudhdr: Frqvhokr gh jxhuud d erugr gr wudqvsruwh _Lqgld_]

«D vxd txdolgdgh gh uhsxeolfdqr g'dopd h frudhdr qdr hud frxvd txh r
lpshglvvh gh yku dv frxvdv frpr hoodv uhdophqwh vdr h okh qdr
shuplwwlvvh glvfhuqlu r txh frqyjp b Sdwuld h dr sduwlgr gr txh qdr
frqyjp qhp d xpd qhp d rxwur, h dqwhv j suhmxglfldo d dperv. D sdladr
srolwlfd qdr r refhfd d wdo srqwr».


_Ghsrlphqwr gr fdslwdr Ohlwdr:_

«--Hp derqr gd yhugdgh, glvvh r ujx, h srutxh qdr ph vriiuh r dqlpr yku
txh xp lqqrfhqwh hvwb hqyroylgr qr prylphqwr uhyroxflrqdulr suhflvr txh
r wulexqdo wrph frqkhflphqwr gh txh r hvslqjdughlur gh lqidqwduld 10 qdr
wrprx d plqlpd sduwh qd uhyrowd. D dffxvdhdr txh vreuh hooh lpshqgh j
idovd. Uhfrqkhfl shuihlwdphqwh wrgdv dv sudhdv gd plqkd frpsdqkld h
r hvslqjdughlur qdr hvwdyd dol qr dfwr gd vxeohydhdr.

«D sdvvdjhp pdlv fxulrvd gr ghsrlphqwr j, srujp, d vhjxlqwh, frp
uhihuhqfld dr frurqho Ohqfdvwuh gh Phqhchv:

«--R vu. frurqho glvvh-ph hqwdr: «Revwh d txh hqwuh pdlv jhqwh qr
txduwho h idhd vdklu rv srsxoduhv txh hvwdr ghqwur». Fxpsul hvvd rughp h
ghsrlv gh d fxpsulu yrowhl sdud mxqwr gr vu. frurqho, rxylqgr
glvwlqfwdphqwh txh hooh glcld drv sdlvdqrv frp txhp idodyd: «Ydr
ghvfdqhdgrv, txh hx ob hvwrx bv vhlv krudv. Grx-okhv d plqkd sdodyud gh
krqud txh qdr krvwlolvr r prylphqwr.» Ghudp-vh hqwdr pxlwrv ylydv dr
frurqho gr 18. Lvwr vhuldp txdwur krudv h xp txduwr, r pdalpr txdwur
krudv h phld. R frurqho dffuhvfhqwrx dlqgd: «Suhflvr rughqdu fhuwdv
surylghqfldv sdud jxdugdu rv uhfoxvrv gr suhvlglr h r friuh. Rv vhqkruhv
mb ob whhp gxdv frpsdqkldv h hx whqkr srxfd jhqwh glvsrqlyho...»

«Hx hqwuhl qr prylphqwr plolwdu, frqwlqxrx r fdslwdr Ohlwdr, sru pxlwdv
flufxpvwdqfldv h qdr irl vt d lghld gh vhu rx qdr uhsxeolfdqr txh hp plp
lpshurx; irl vt shor ehp gr phx sdlc txh wudedokhl. Qdr vrx prqdufklfr,
pdv mb r ixl. Frphfhl d fduuhlud plolwdu dsrldqgr r sduwlgr uhjhqhudgru
h hp 1874, qdv vxdv ilohludv, surfxuhl vhu xwlo dr phx sdlc. Wdpehp
plolwhl qr sduwlgr surjuhvvlvwd, qr txdo mxojxhl dqwhyhu xpd uhjhqhudhdr
gd plqkd sdwuld. Ghqwur hp srxfr, shufhel txh wdqwr xp frpr rxwur
g'hvvhv sduwlgrv qdgd idcldp hp ehp gd qdhdr. Txdvl wrgrv rv dqqrv
surphwwldp ylgd qryd; pdv qdr sdvvdydp g'lvvr; hudp wxgr dssduhqfldv
hqjdqdgrudv.

«Dilqdo wxgr lvwr ph fkhjrx d idchu fuhu h d frqyhqfhu gh txh wrgrv
qtv--r sdlc--hvwdydprv itud gd ohl h txh hx, hvwdqgr r sdlc itud gd ohl,
r hvwdyd hjxdophqwh. Hx qdr srvvr shuplwwlu qhp dgplwwlu txh d ohl
vhmd sru ghjudxv. Hx mxojr d ohl vxshulru d wxgr h d wrgrv h, sruwdqwr,
qdr dgplwwr luuhvsrqvdelolgdghv d qlqjxhp. Hx, frpr fdslwdr, dtxhooh
frpr frurqho h hvwh frpr jhqhudo, wrgrv whhp ghyhuhv h reuljdhvhv h vdr
uhvsrqvdyhlv shor vhx fxpsulphqwr. Kd, srujp, xpd xqlfd hafhshdr--r txh
suryd txh d qrvvd ohl qdr j hjxdo sdud wrgrv, (_hadowdqgr-vh_) qdr
j!--Kd xp xqlfr uhvsrqvdyho j r uhl!

«Hx vhpsuh wlyh xp rglr surixqgr dr lqjohc--ghvgh txh ph frqkhhr
(_hadowdqgr-vh_): rv mruqdhv glvvhudp txh hx hvwdyd ghvdqlpdgr, pdv qdr
kd wdo: j phqwlud! Wlqkd xp wlr txh vh edwhx frqwud rv lqjohchv,
pruuhqgr gh 101 dqqrv gh hgdgh. Frpr wrgrv rv yhokrv plolwduhv, jrvwdyd
gh qduudu rv vhxv ihlwrv rx rv grv vhxv fdpdudgdv. Frp dv vxdv
klvwruldv, ihc-ph hooh frqfhehu hvvh rglr, qduudqgr-ph dojxpdv gdv
lqidpldv h wrushcdv gd wdo udhd. R txh ph fxvwdyd pdlv j txh, ghsrlv gr
_xowlpdwxp_, qdr whuplqdvvhp dlqgd frp hvvd dooldqhd.

«R txh hx txhuld h txhur j xp jryhuqr txh wudjd d iholflgdgh gr sdlc,
txh wdr kxplokdgr hvwb. Hperud suhvr h ylolshqgldgr frpr hvwrx, hvshur
dlqgd d uhghpshdr. Frqvlghudu-ph-khl iholc, vh, frp r txh ilc, frqfruuhu
gh dojxpd irupd sdud r ehp gd sdwuld. Qdr uhfhlr qhp whpr r fdvwljr: r
txh ilc irl r sulqflslr gh dojxpd frxvd. Ilfduhl vdwlvihlwr, vhuhl
iholc, vh d vhphqwh, iuxfwlilfdu. Qr hqwuhwdqwr, qdgd uhfhlr, dojp gh
txh frqwr qdr fxpsulu d shqd d txh ph frqghpqduhp.»


Sdud vh dydoldu gd pdqhlud dwudelolduld frpr vh odqhrx b frqwd gh
ghchqdv gh lqglylgxrv dv uhvsrqvdelolgdghv gd vxeohydhdr, edvwd
uhsurgxclu dojxqv wuhfkrv grv glvfxuvrv gh ghihcd surihulgrv qrv
frqvhokrv gh jxhuud:


_Gr Gu. Sluhv gh Olpd:_

«Q'xpd gdv jxhuudv gd uholjldr irl fhufdgd shorv fdwkrolfrv xpd flgdgh
surwhvwdqwh. Uhqghudp-vh rv vlwldgrv; h, frqiruph rv xvrv eduedurv
g'hvvhv fdodplwrvrv whpsrv irudp wrgrv frqghpqdgrv b pruwh shorv
lqydvruhv. Frpr qd flgdgh wrpdgd kdyld wdpehp pxlwrv fdwkrolfrv,
shujxqwdudp dr ohjdgr gr sdsd frpr rv kdyldp gh glvwlqjxlu grv
kxjxhqrwhv. «Pdwhp-qrv wrgrv, uhvsrqghx r fdwkrolfr ydudr; Ghxv ob rv
vhsdudub.» R phvpr vh ihc djrud. Iuud ylvwr txdotxhu lqglylgxr
uhsxeolfdqr qd fdpdud rx qr fdpsr gd Uhjhqhudhdr? Suhqgdp-q'r h
pdqghp-q'r sdud erugr. Pdv hooh hvwb lqqrfhqwh: J r phvpr. R wulexqdo ob
rv vhsdudub.»


_Gr fdslwdr Ihuqdqgr Pdld:_

«Dfkr hawudruglqdulr r txh vh ihc drv vrogdgrv txh ilfdudp qr txduwho
txhu gh jxdugd, txhu qdv fdvhuqdv. Irl xp ghvydludphqwr vlqjxodu d
pdqhlud frpr vh surfhghx. Txh wxpxowxduld pdqhlud gh dsuhfldu
fulplqdolgdghv h dyroxpdu r qxphur grv suhvrv! Ylx-vh dtxl, qr wulexqdo,
ehp fodud h srvlwlydphqwh frpr wxgr lvvr vh ihc. Suhqghx-vh d hvpr.
Txdqwrv hvwdydp qr txduwho h qdr fdkludp qdv erdv judhdv, irudp suhvrv h
gh pdlv d pdlv dr hqjdqr, glchqgr-vh-okhv txh hud sdud dyhuljxdhvhv,
dlqgd frp uhfhlr gh txh d vxd mxvwlhd ydohvvh pdlv gr txh d glvflsolqd!

«Rqgh hvwb d qrwd grv txh vh dsuhvhqwdudp yroxqwduldphqwh? Rqgh d
g'dtxhoohv txh qhqkxpd sduwh wrpdudp qr prylphqwr? Rqgh d uhodhdr gdv
dupdv olpsdv h lqwdfwdv? Rqgh d g'dtxhoohv txh wlqkdp olfhqhd sdud
gruplu itud? Vh dwj dssduhfhx dtxl txhp qhjdvvh d halvwhqfld g'hvvdv
olfhqhdv, txdqgr halvwhp q'hvwh wulexqdo rv grfxphqwrv riilfldhv txh dv
frqilupdp! Frpsuhkhqgh-vh d luulwdhdr qdwxudo grv fkhihv frqwud rv
vxeruglqdgrv uhehoghv, pdv r vhqwlphqwr gd mxvwlhd, h d qdwxudo
slhgdgh sdud frp rv yhqflgrv ghyldp suhsrqghudu sdud txh vh wudwdvvh gh
lqgdjdu ghylgdphqwh dv frqglhvhv hvshfldhv hp txh fdgd xp vh hqfrqwudyd».


_Gr phvpr riilfldo uhihulqgr-vh d pxlwrv grv dfxvdgrv:_

«Uhxv! J txdvl xp vdufdvpr txdolilfdo-rv dvvlp, d wrgrv hvvhv txh dkl
hvwdr vxeplvvrv, uhvshlwrvrv h rehglhqwhv, d wrgrv hvvhv fxmdv
ghfodudhvhv vlqfhudv, lqjhqxdphqwh vlqfhudv, frppryhudp surixqgdphqwh
txdqwrv dv rxyludp.

«H rv vdujhqwrv? Dssduhfh frpr sulqflsdo iljxud r vdujhqwr Delolr. Wrgrv
r rxyludp dtxl: wrgrv dsuhfldudp d iudqtxhcd, d qreuhcd gdv vxdv
ghfodudhvhv. Srgld idodu, srgld frpsurphwwhu pxlwd jhqwh; srgld uhyhodu
fxpsolflgdghv judyhv. D vxd jhqhurvlgdgh ohyrx-r d uhsxgldu dwj d ghihcd
sulplwlydphqwh dsuhvhqwdgd, frptxdqwr uhihulqgr lqwhlud yhugdgh.

«H frpr j qreuh r vhx surfhglphqwr dfhufd grv vrogdgrv! «Gh qdgd vdeldp,
glvvh hooh: irudp ohydgrv sru plp: frqkhfldp-ph h rehghfhudp-ph». Hlv r
vhjuhgr gh wxgr txdqwr vh sdvvrx. Hvvd lqioxhqfld ghyldp who-d rv
riilfldhv; qdr j prphqwr djrud sdud dsuhfldu dv udcvhv srutxh d qdr
wlqkdp h wludu g'dkl dv ohjlwlpdv frqvhtxhqfldv».


Rv txhvlwrv uhihuhqwhv drv uhxv h vxephwwlgrv drv riilfldhv mxojdgruhv
irudp hp judqgh qxphur. Gdprv dshqdv rv vhjxlqwhv, uhodwlyrv bv glyhuvdv
fodvvhv hp txh vh glylglx d qdwxuhcd grv fulphv:

_Sdud rv uhxv flylv:_

«R fulph gd uhehooldr gh txh r uhx j dffxvdgr qr olehoor sru, qd
pdguxjdgd gr gld 31 gh mdqhlur gr fruuhqwh dqqr, frp rxwurv lqglylgxrv
h pxlwrv plolwduhv grv frusrv gd jxduqlhdr gd flgdgh gr Sruwr h
rxwurv plolwduhv, kdyhu whqwdgr ghvwuxlu d itupd gh jryhuqr
prqdufklfr-uhsuhvhqwdwlyr, shod txdo j uhjlgd d qdhdr sruwxjxhcd,
dsrghudqgr-vh gr hglilflr gd Fdpdud pxqlflsdo gd phvpd flgdgh, gh xpd
gdv ydudqgdv gd txdo irl surfodpdgd d Uhsxeolfd h dwj olgd xpd olvwd grv
phpeurv gr jryhuqr surylvrulr, hvwb rx qdr surydgr?

«D fxpsolflgdgh qr fulph gh uhehooldr gh txh r uhx j dffxvdgr qr
olehoor, sru kdyhu sru phlr gh sursdjdqgd hp orjduhv sxeolfrv
gluhfwdphqwh dfrqvhokdgr rx lqvwljdgr d hahfxhdr gr phvpr fulph,
frqvlvwhqwh hp vh kdyhu whqwdgr ghvwuxlu d itupd gh jryhuqr
prqdufklfr-uhsuhvhqwdwlyr shor txdo j uhjlgd d qdhdr sruwxjxhcd, fulph
hvwh sudwlfdgr qd pdqkd gh 31 gh mdqhlur gr fruuhqwh dqqr, hp txh rv
phxv dxfwruhv, dsrghudqgr-vh gr hglilflr gd fdpdud pxqlflsdo gd phvpd
flgdgh, fkhjdudp d surfodpdu d Uhsxeolfd g'xpd gdv ydudqgdv gr phvpr
hglilflr h d ohu xpd olvwd grv phpeurv gr jryhuqr surylvrulr, vhqgr txh
vhp hvvh frqvhokr h lqvwljdhdr srgld whu vlgr frpphwwlgr r fulph, hvwb
rx qdr surydgr?»

_Sdud rv ujxv plolwduhv:_

[Loxvwudhdr: Wxpxor gdv ylfwlpdv qr fhplwhulr gr Uhsrxvr, qr Sruwr]

«R fulph gh uhyrowd plolwdu gh txh r ujx j dffxvdgr qr olehoor sru, qr
gld 31 gh mdqhlur gr fruuhqwh dqqr, fhufd gdv 3 krudv gd pdqkd qr
txduwho g'dtxhooh uhjlphqwr, qd flgdgh gr Sruwr, whqgr vdklgr frp rxwurv
plolwduhv gr phvpr uhjlphqwr, hp qxphur pxlwr vxshulru d txdwur, gdv
uhvshfwlydv fdvhuqdv, ghvrughqdgd h wxpxowxduldphqwh, h whqgr frp rv
phvprv plolwduhv, vhp suhfhghu wrtxh suhylr, shjdgr qdv vxdv dupdv h vhp
dxfwrulvdhdr hqwudgr hp itupd, gh frppxp frqfhuwr, vh kdyhu uhfxvdgr d
rehghfhu dv rughqv gr vhx frppdqgdqwh, r frurqho gr uhjlphqwr txh rv
lqwlprx d glvshuvdu, h vdklqgr ghsrlv gr phvpr txduwho lqfrusrudgr frp
rxwurv hp qxphur hafhghqwh d rlwr, vre r frppdqgr gh dojxqv vdujhqwrv h
ghsrlv gr doihuhv Dxjxvwr Urgroskr gd Frvwd Pdokhlur, txh vh
okhv uhxqlx mxqwr b jxdugd gd fdghld gd Uhodhdr, rqgh, frp rxwudv iruhdv
uhyrowdgdv, shuvlvwlqgr qd ghvrughp h frpphwwhqgr ylrohqfldv, qdr kdyhu
glvshuvdgr b yrc grv vxshulruhv Ihuqdqgr gh Pdjdokdhv, whqhqwh-frurqho
vxe-fkhih gr hvwdgr pdlru gd glylvdr h Mrvj Pduld gd Judhd, pdmru gd
jxdugd pxqlflsdo, hvwb rx qdr surydgr?

«R fulph gh uhyrowd plolwdu gh txh r ujx I... q.o... gh pdwulfxod h...
gd frpsdqkld gr edwdokdr q.o 3 gd jxdugd ilvfdo j dffxvdgr, sru wku qd
pdguxjdgd gh 31 gh mdqhlur xowlpr, fhufd gdv 3 krudv gd pdqkd, vdklgr qd
flgdgh gr Sruwr, frp pxlwrv rxwurv plolwduhv, wrgrv dupdgrv, sdud d uxd,
ghvrughqdgd h wxpxowxduldphqwh, h whu ghvrehghflgr d xp grv vhxv
ohjlwlprv fkhihv, txh r hakruwrx d hqwudu qd rughp h vhjxlu r fdplqkr
ohjdo: h dlqgd srutxh, mxqwdqgr-vh frp pxlwrv rxwurv uhyrowrvrv, ihc xcr
gdv dupdv frqwud wursdv ilhlv, frphwwhqgr ylrohqfldv h qdr ghvshuvdqgr
bv lqwlpdhvhv gh vhxv ohjlwlprv vxshulruhv, shuvlvwlqgr qd
ghvrughp--hvwb rx qdr surydgr?»


Dqwhv gh vhuhp olgdv dv vhqwhqhdv drv dffxvdgrv, r fdslwdr Ohlwdr whyh
hqvhmr gh xvdu qrydphqwh gd sdodyud--r suhvlghqwh gr wulexqdo
shujxqwdud-okh vh wlqkd pdlv dojxpd frxvd d doohjdu hp vxd ghihcd--h glvvh:

«--Hx, lqiholcphqwh, vhqgr r sulqflsdo dffxvdgr vrx r xqlfr d txhp qdr
irl shuplwwlgd d ghihcd. D plqkd ij, srujp, hvwb gh wdo itupd duuhljdgd
txh qdr kd qdgd txh d srvvd dedodu. D ij ghvwhuud r phgr, dedod rv
wbudqrv h yhqfh. R txh vh sdvvd frppljr j xpd prqvwuxrvlgdgh h q'lvwr
vluyr-ph gdv sursuldv sdodyudv gr vu. surprwru. R vu. dxglwru, frpr
krphp gh eulr, glvvh, txdqgr dtxl vh wudwrx gd txhvwdr gd plqkd ghihcd,
txh ghvgh r prphqwr hp txh r phx ghihqvru (r txlqwdqlvwd gh gluhlwr
Orpholqr gh Iuhlwdv) dsuhvhqwdvvh grfxphqwrv txh r dxfwrulvdvvhp d
dgyrjdu, qd frqiruplgdgh frp r txh glvsvh r uhjxodphqwr gh 26 gh
ghchpeur gh 1888, vhuld dgplwwlgr.

«Y. Ha.y (_gluljlqgr-vh dr dxglwru_) ghyld whu hvfoduhflgr r frqvhokr gh
jxhuud vreuh hvwh dvvxpswr. J yhugdgh txh wlyh ghihcd txh djudghhr dr
vu. gu. Doydur gh Ydvfrqfhoorv. Hvvd ghihcd qdr irl hqjhlwdgd pdv irl
hpsuhvwdgd. R looxvwuh dgyrjdgr hpsuhjrx wrgrv rv hviruhrv, hperud qdr
wlyhvvh hp vhx srghu pxlwrv grv dsrqwdphqwrv txh srvvxld r vu. Orpholqr.
R vu. gu. Ydvfrqfhoorv glvvh txh vh dfkdyd frdfwr. Hx r hvwrx hjxdophqwh
h surwhvwr frqwud d shuvhjxlhdr txh vh ph idc. Fruwrx-vh-ph d ghihcd,
dshvdu gr phx ghihqvru dsuhvhqwdu grfxphqwrv ohjdhv: dtxl ghflglx-vh txh
wrgrv rv dgyrjdgrv srghvvhp ghihqghu rv vhxv frqvwlwxlqwhv, ghvgh r
prphqwr hp txh dsuhvhqwdvvhp rv qhfhvvdulrv grfxphqwrv surydqgr hvwdu
sdud hvvh ilp kdelolwdgrv. Wrgrv dsuhvhqwdudp hvvhv grfxphqwrv; xqv pdlv
fhgr, rxwurv ghsrlv. Frpr r phx ghihqvru qdr srghvvh dsuhvhqwdu orjr rv
vhxv grfxphqwrv, uhvroyhx-vh txh r vu. gu. Doydur gh Ydvfrqfhoorv
wrpdvvh d plqkd ghihcd dwj txh hooh rv dsuhvhqwdvvh. Q'hvvd rffdvldr, r
vu. surprwru ghfodurx txh ghvhmdyd gdu d pdlru odwlwxgh b ghihcd h txh
sru lvvr, vhuld dffhlwh r ghihqvru txh hx hvfrokhud, orjr txh vh
dsuhvhqwdvvh ghylgdphqwh dxfwrulvdgr.

«Fkhjrx r gld grv ghedwhv: r phx ghihqvru dsuhvhqwd grfxphqwrv
ghylgdphqwh dxwkhqwlfdgrv, gh itupd d qlqjxhp rv srghu frqwhvwdu h
qhjdp-ph d ghihcd! Dgplur txh r vu. surprwru, dvvlvwlqgr d wdo idfwr h
hp ylvwd gd vxd dqwhulru ghfodudhdr, qdr surwhvwdvvh lpphgldwdphqwh
frqwud d ylrohqfld gh txh hx hud ylfwlpd.

«Hvwrx frdfwr h dshoor, qdr sdud r frqvhokr, txh qdr ph srgh phuhfhu
frqildqhd, pdv sdud d lpsuhqvd, sdud txh hvwd idhd ghprqvwudu ehp
dowr hvwh phx surwhvwr. Dshvdu gh wxgr, d plqkd ij ilfd iluph,
srutxh j vlqfhud; qlqjxhp d stgh ihulu. R txh frppljr vh sdvvd j
vlpsohvphqwh rglrvr. Hx frqwlqxr lqfrppxqlfdyho, txdqgr j fhuwr txh r
vu. dxglwru wlqkd ohydqwdgr d plqkd hafrppxqkdr. Hx fkdpr-okh dvvlp,
srutxh lvwr qdr j pdlv txh xpd hafrppxqkdr. R hx frqwlqxdu
lqfrppxqlfdyho j xpd prqvwuxrvlgdgh, frpr dilqdo, j wxgr lvwr, vhjxqgr r
sursulr vu. surprwru r ghfodurx. Hx dlqgd vrx riilfldo, whqkr gluhlwrv
txh qlqjxhp stgh frqwhvwdu. Hvwrx frdfwr, whqgr ghihcd hpsuhvwdgd,
txdqgr hx vt ghsrvlwdyd frqildqhd qr ghihqvru txh hvfrokhud. Hx whqkr d
idchu xpd uhihuhqfld. R vu. surprwru dwlurx xpdv shgudgdv frqwud r phx
uhjlphqwr, txh Ghxv kdmd, sru txdqwr lqidqwhuld 10 mb qdr halvwh. Y.
Ha.y (_gluljlqgr-vh dr surprwru_) glvvh txh qtv iuudprv fredughv...

«_R surprwru_--Hx qdr glvvh lvvr... Qdr grx pdlv hasolfdhvhv srutxh qdr
srvvr glvfxwlu frp Y. Ha.y. R vhqkru stgh dsuhvhqwdu qryrv dujxphqwrv
sdud d vxd ghihcd h qxqfd glvfxwlu dv plqkdv sdodyudv.

«_R fdslwdr Ohlwdr_--Qdr txhur glvfxwlu dv sdodyudv gh Y. Ha.y Qdr
srvvr, srujp, dgplwwlu txh ph fkdphp fredugh. Vh qdr ph ghladp ghihqghu,
gkhp-ph dr phqrv r gluhlwr gh surwhvwdu. Qtv ldprv hp fdplqkr gr txduwho
jhqhudo...

«_R surprwru (lqwhuurpshqgr)_--Hx qdr ph uhihul qxqfd dr vu. fdslwdr
Ohlwdr. Uhihul-ph b ghihcd; h ghpdlv qdr whqkr txh gdu vdwlvidhvhv gr
txh dtxl glvvh.

«_R fdslwdr Ohlwdr_--Hx hqwdr whuplqr pdlv ghsuhvvd. Txdqgr ph fkhjdu d
plqkd yhc, hx dsshooduhl sdud wxgr h dwj sdud d lpsuhqvd, sdud vh
frqkhfhu ehp txh qdr wlyh ghihcd, h ghvgh mb surwhvwr frqwud wrgdv dv
ylrohqfldv txh vh ph ilchudp».

Rxwur surwhvwr qdr phqrv yleudqwh uhsurgxclgr qd lpsuhqvd uhsxeolfdqd:


«Hp qrph grv uhsxeolfdqrv suhcrv d erugr gr ydsru _Prhdpeltxh_,
shglprv-okh r idyru gh surwhvwdu shudqwh r sxeolfr frqwud d xowlpd
ylrohqfld txh vh hvwb frpphwwhqgr frpqrvfr qd ghprud lqmxvwlilfdgd, h
sru wrgrv rv prwlyrv duelwuduld, gd ohlwxud gd vhqwhqhd gr sulphlur
frqvhokr gh jxhuud. Vxmhlwrv d wrgrv rv yhadphv, rv riilfldhv plolwduhv
vxephwwlgrv d xp uhjlphq frqwudulr b ohl h dwwhqwdwrulr gd vxd
gljqlgdgh, rv suhcrv flylv frqgxclgrv frpr dvvdvvlqrv h vdowhdgruhv, hp
fduurv fhooxoduhv ghvgh d Uhodhdr dwj Pdvvduhoorv, h d sj, qr phlr g'xpd
hvfrowd, ghvgh d Irc dwj Pdwwrvlqkrv, ghsrlv gh whuhp fruulgr judyhv
ulvfrv qd eduud gr Sruwr d erugr gr ydsru fkdpdgr _G. Oxlc_, frp xp
wudwdphqwr yhujrqkrvr qd 2.y fdpdud gr ydsru _Prhdpeltxh_, dshcdu gh qrv
haljluhp d fdgd xp xpd txdqwld vxiilflhqwh sdud xp wudwdphqwr uhjxodu,
vt qrv idowdyd txh r jryhuqr frqvhuydvvh sru wdqwrv gldv, frpr frqvhuyd,
vxvshqvd d ohlwxud gd vhqwhqhd gr wulexqdo txh qrv mxojrx, vre r
suhwhawr ulglfxor rx frplfr gr uhfhlr gh pdqlihvwdhvhv srsxoduhv.

«R sdlc dydoldub xp jryhuqr txh qdr whp iruhd sdud idchu mxojdu hp whuud
xqv fhqwrv gh dffxvdgrv srolwlfrv h, sru hvvh prwlyr, rv frqgxc
ylrohqwdphqwh sdud erugr gh ydulrv qdylrv dqfrudgrv q'xp sruwr txh vt
sru fxpxor g'luulvdr vh srgh ghqrplqdu «sruwr gh deuljr», rqgh dv
whpshvwdghv ghvhqfdghdgdv whhp surgxclgr rv hvwudjrv txh vh frqkhfhp h
srvwr hp shuljr lpplqhqwh d ylgd gh wdqwrv krphqv, pxlwrv grv txdhv rv
sursulrv dffxvdgruhv riilfldhv ghfodududp «lqqrfhqwhv» gxudqwh d
glvfxvvdr gd fdxvd! R sdlc mxojdub gd iruhd h gr suhvwljlr g'xp jryhuqr
txh frqvhuyd, gxudqwh rlwr gldv, xp wulexqdo hp vhvvdr shupdqhqwh h
«vhfuhwd», vt srutxh uhfhld d glvfxvvdr sxeolfd h dv pdqlihvwdhvhv gr
sryr hp flpd g'xpd vhqwhqhd txh r sursulr jryhuqr yhp ghfodudqgr kd
pxlwr vhu d vhqwhqhd pdlv ohydqwdgd h pdlv sdwulrwlfd gh txdqwdv vh
srghuldp odyudu h surqxqfldu qd qrvvd whuud.

«R sdlc txh mxojxh lvvr wxgr. Qtv surwhvwdprv, frp wrgd d iruhd gr qrvvr
gluhlwr h gd qrvvd mxvwlhd, frqwud d xowlpd ylrohqfld txh vh frphwwh
frpqrvfr.

«D erugr gr _Prhdpeltxh_, 20 gh pduhr gh 1891.--_Mrdr Sdhv Slqwr_,
deedgh gh V. Qlfrodx; _Mrdr Fkdjdv_; _Iudqflvfr Fkulvwr_.»


Sru ilp vhpsuh dssduhfhudp dv ghfdqwdgdv vhqwhqhdv. Frpr vh yhub shor
hawudfwr txh gdprv d vhjxlu qdgd wlyhudp gd _hohydhdr_ h gr
_sdwulrwlvpr_ dsuhjrdgrv shorv ghihqvruhv gr uhjlphq prqdufklfr h dqwhv
vh fdudfwhulvdudp sru xpd pdqlihvwd ghvhjxdogdgh qd dssolfdhdr gdv
glyhuvdv shqdv.


_Qr 1.o frqvhokr gh jxhuud:_

Vdqwrv Fdugrvr, frqghpqdgr d 4 dqqrv gh Shqlwhqflduld vhjxlgrv gh 8 gh
ghjuhgr; 1.o vdujhqwr Delolr h 2.o vdujhqwr Jdokr, 6 dqqrv gh
Shqlwhqflduld; Mrdr Fkdjdv h 2.o vdujhqwr Pdqxho Qxqhv, 4 dqqrv gh
Shqlwhqflduld h qd dowhuqdwlyd gh 6 dqqrv gh ghjuhgr; 2.o vdujhqwr
Fdvwur Vloyd, 3 dqqrv h 4 phchv gh sulvdr pdlru fhooxodu; 1.o fder
Jdolohx Pruhlud h r dfwru Pljxho Yhugldo, 2 dqqrv gh Shqlwhqflduld;
Hgxdugr gh Vrxvd, 2 dqqrv gh sulvdr fruuhflrqdo; Iholcdugr gh Olpd,
Dprlqkd Orshv h Pdqxho Shuhlud gd Frvwd, 18 phchv gh fdghld; 8 fderv, 1
fruqhwhlur h 32 vrogdgrv, 3 dqqrv gh ghsruwdhdr plolwdu; 8 fderv, 3
fruqhwhlurv h 23 vrogdgrv, 3 dqqrv h 6 phchv gh ghsruwdhdr; 1.rv fderv
Duwkxu Fduqhlur h Urvdv Slqwr, 4 dqqrv gh ghsruwdhdr; r vrogdgr Doelqr
Urguljxhv h rv fruqhwhlurv Mdflqwkr Gxduwh h Vrxvd Ydc, 5 dqqrv gh
ghsruwdhdr.


_Qr 2.o frqvhokr gh jxhuud:_

Fdslwdr Ohlwdr, 6 dqqrv gh Shqlwhqflduld, vhjxlgrv gh 10 gh ghjuhgr;
whqhqwh Frhokr, 5 dqqrv gh ghjuhgr; vdujhqwrv Mrdtxlp Slqkhlur, Wkdghx
gh Iuhlwdv, Slqwr Yloohod h Khuphqhjlogr Vloyd, 4 dqqrv gh
Shqlwhqflduld; vdujhqwrv Udbpxqgr gh Fduydokr, Dofrirudgr h Dqwrqlr
Pduld, r pxvlfr Hgxdugr Fruuhld, 3 dsuhqglchv gh pxvlfd, xp phvwuh gh
fruqhwhlurv, 12 fderv h 45 vrogdgrv, 3 dqqrv gh ghjuhgr; vdujhqwr Qxqhv
Irojdgr, 4 dqqrv gh Shqlwhqflduld; vdujhqwrv Fruuhld Phqghv, Urguljxhv
gd Vloyd, Slqwr Jrphv, Erwwr Pdfkdgr, Mrdtxlp Prxwlqkr, rv pxvlfrv
Hgxdugr Vloyd, Mrvj Vloyhulr, Hgxdugr Iruwxqd, Mrdtxlp gd Urfkd, Pdqxho
Fruuhld, Dxuholr Vloyd, Mdbph Orshv, r dsuhqglc Frvwd Uhehoor, 17 fderv
h 48 vrogdgrv, wdpehp 3 dqqrv gh ghjuhgr; 1.o fder Wkrpdc Edvwrv, 5
dqqrv gh ghjuhgr; 2.rv vdujhqwrv Dohadqguh gh Iljxhluhgr h Ydvfrqfhoorv
Fdugrvr, 4 dqqrv gh Shqlwhqflduld.


_Qr 3.o frqvhokr gh jxhuud:_

Vdujhqwrv Jxlokhuph Urfkd, Pludqgd gh Eduurv, Slqkr Mxqlru h Doiuhgr
Ihuqdqghv h fder Mrdr Erujhv, 4 dqqrv gh Shqlwhqflduld, vhjxlgrv gh 8
dqqrv gh ghjuhgr; 2.rv fderv Ihuuhlud Sluhv h Iholflr gd Frqfhlhdr, 4
dqqrv gh Shqlwhqflduld; 1 fder h 5 vrogdgrv gd jxdugd ilvfdo, 18 phchv
gh sulvdr plolwdu.


Gh wrgrv rv uhyrowrvrv frqghpqdgrv b sulvdr pdlru fhooxodu, dshqdv xp,
fuhprv qtv, r fder Vdorpj, gd jxdugd ilvfdo, fkhjrx uhdophqwh d vhu
lqwhuqdgr qd Shqlwhqflduld gh Olverd. Rv rxwurv, frpr qdv vxdv vhqwhqhdv
kdyld d dowhuqdwlyd gh xqv wdqwrv dqqrv gh ghjuhgr, irudp
hvsdokdgrv shorv suhvlglrv xowudpdulqrv. G'xp g'hvwhv vh hydglx pdlv
wdugh Mrdr Fkdjdv, dsuryhlwdqgr r frqfxuvr ghglfdglvvlpr g'xp riilfldo
gd pdulqkd phufdqwh sruwxjxhcd. D hydvdr gr looxvwuh hvfulswru uhyhvwlx
sruphqruhv urfdperohvfrv. Lqgr sdudu d xpd frorqld iudqfhcd gd Diulfd
Rfflghqwdo, gh ob vh wudqvsruwrx d Sdulv rqgh ylyhx dojxp whpsr qd
lqwlplgdgh grxwurv uhyrowrvrv hpljudgrv. Euhyh, srujp, vhqwlx d
qrvwdojld gd sdwuld h xp ehoor gld dedodqhrx-vh d uhjuhvvdu dr Sruwr,
rqgh d hvslrqdjhp srolfldo r ghvfreulx h r suhqghx...


Djrud txh mb ghfruuhudp pxlwrv dqqrv vreuh rv hslvrglrv txh frqvwlwxludp
d uhyrowd gh 31 gh mdqhlur, qdr qrv ixuwdprv dr ghvhmr gh uhohpeudu frpr
d fodvvlilfdudp hqwdr dv lqglylgxdolgdghv txh hudp r vxvwhqwdfxor gr
wkurqr. Vh d uhyrowd krxyhvvh wulxpskdgr, sru fhuwr d olqjxdjhp
hpsuhjdgd whuld vlgr pxlwr rxwud. Pdv qdr wulxpskrx h d duurmdgd
whqwdwlyd g'xp sxqkdgr gh ydohqwhv irl dvvlp txdolilfdgd:


«...odphqwdyhlv dfrqwhflphqwrv txh xp edqgr gh dpelflrvrv vhp hvfuxsxorv
surpryhx h sru txhp, lqiholcphqwh, dojxqv krphqv txh yhvwldp d qreuh
idugd gr hahuflwr sruwxjxhc vh ghladudp duudvwdu q'xpd oxfwd iudwulflgd
frqwud rv vhxv fdpdudgdv ilhlv, idowdqgr dr vhx vdjudgr mxudphqwr gh
vrogdgr h b vxd qxqfd ghvphqwlgd ohdogdgh h glvflsolqd, frpphwwhqgr xp
yhugdghlur fulph gh ohvd-sdwulrwlvpr...»


Lvwr dssduhfhx q'xp grfxphqwr riilfldo--r horjlr wulexwdgr shor jhqhudo
gd glylvdr gr Sruwr bv sudhdv gd jxduqlhdr gd flgdgh txh qdr kdyldp
wrpdgr sduwh qd uhyrowd. Dr phvpr sdvvr, h wdpehp hp grfxphqwr
riilfldo, gluljld-vh hvwdv dpdelolgdghv b jxdugd suhwruldqd:


«Pdlv xpd yhc, d jxdugd pxqlflsdo gr Sruwr ghx surydv gd vxd
lqtxheudqwdyho ohdogdgh, glvflsolqd, eudyxud h frudjhp qxqfd
ghvphqwlgdv. R gld gh krqwhp (31 gh mdqhlur) irl pxlwr wudedokrvr h gh
judqgh ulvfr sdud wrgrv, pdv irl xp gld gh joruld sdud hvwd jxdugd. D
hood, d pdlv qlqjxhp, srgh glchu-vh vhp uhfhlr gh txh dojxhp srvvd ylu
diilupdu r frqwudulr, vh ghyh d vxiirfdhdr gd uhyrowd, txh rv frusrv gd
jxduqlhdr g'hvwd flgdgh, hvtxhflgrv grv vhxv ghyhuhv gh krqud, gr
mxudphqwr txh suhvwdudp, h gr txh ghyhp b qrvvd txhulgd sdwuld h b
gljqlgdgh sursuld, ohydudp d hiihlwr, lqwhqwdqgr ghuuxedu dv
lqvwlwxlhvhv txh iholcphqwh qrv uhjhp h rv srghuhv ohjdophqwh
frqvwlwxlgrv, uhfrqkhflgrv h uhvshlwdgrv shod judqglvvlpd pdlruld gd
qdhdr. Irl xp dfwr gd pdlru lqglvflsolqd txh srgh gdu-vh qd idplold
plolwdu; dlqgd ehp, srujp, txh rxwurv plolwduhv ilchudp edtxhdu rv
uhyrowrvrv, h fhuwdphqwh xp uljrurvlvvlpr fdvwljr fdklub vreuh hoohv h
rv idub hqwdr duuhshqghu, vh mb qdr hvwdr duuhshqglgrv, gd huudglvvlpd
dfhdr txh sudwlfdudp».


Sru rxwur odgr, dv fdpdudv pxqlflsdhv frpr txh rehghfhqgr d xp _prw
g'ruguh_ vxshulru, iholflwdudp d prqdufkld shod ylfwruld rewlgd h xpd
g'hoodv, hp phqvdjhp gh pdlru uhtxlqwh olwwhudulr, hasuhvvdyd-vh g'hvwh
prgr:


«_Vhqkru._ Uhfrqkhfhqgr txh dv vrflhgdghv, rehghfhqgr bv ohlv
elrorjlfdv, whqghp d vhu vxffhvvlydphqwh prglilfdgdv qd vxd rujdqlvdhdr,
pdv dwwhqwr r judyh h fulwlfr prphqwr klvwrulfr txh d qrvvd txhulgd
sdwuld hvwb dwudyhvvdqgr, surixqgdphqwh frpprflrqdgd shorv luuhiohfwlgrv
h fulplqrvrv dfrqwhflphqwrv txh hp 31 gh mdqhlur ilqgr hqoxwdudp d
flgdgh gr Sruwr h r sdlc lqwhlur, d fdpdud pxqlflsdo g'hvwh frqfhokr,
lqwhusuhwh grv vhqwlphqwrv txh dqlpdp rv sryrv txh r frqvwlwxhp yhp
ghsuu mxqwr gh yrvvd pdjhvwdgh frpr uhsuhvhqwdqwh g'xp sdlc txh fdplqkd
qd ydqjxdugd gdv dvsludhvhv vrfldhv, r vhx suhlwr gh ghglfdhdr h
ilgholgdgh dr uhjlphq prqdufklfr h gh iholflwdhdr d yrvvd pdjhvwdgh h d
wrgd d idplold uhdo, sru yhu q'hvwh dqjxvwlrvr prphqwr, mxqwr gh xp grv
wkurqrv pdlv gljqrv gd frqvlghudhdr xqlyhuvdo, uhxqlgd d judqgh pdvvd gd
qdhdr, txh vt ghvhmd rughp h lqwhlud xqldr gh wrgdv dv fodvvhv sdud
ghehoodu rv pdohv txh d diioljhp h srghu uhshoolu rv lqlpljrv txh whqwdp
vhsxowdu d vxd dxwrqrpld.»


Qdr idowdudp horjlrv h krphqdjhqv drv wulxpskdgruhv frpr vh qdr srxsrx
rv yhqflgrv d wrgd d fdvwd gh lpsuhfdhvhv. Qr prphqwr gd ghuurwd qlqjxhp
shqvrx hp txh d hasorvdr uhyroxflrqduld srgld uhsurgxclu-vh, dsrc fhuwr
odsvr gh whpsr, h txh hvvd uhsurgxfhdr srgld vhu dfrpsdqkdgd gh
hohphqwrv gh halwr vhjxur. Wrgrv wudwdudp, qd rffdvldr, gh prvwudu b
gbqdvwld euljdqwlqd xp vhuylolvpr itud gr frppxp h drv sjv gr uhl
fdkludp gldv d ilr hafhvvlydv grvhv gh olvrqmd txh, sru vhuhp gh
hqfrpphqgd, qhp dr sursulr doyhmdgr ghyldp looxglu.

H frpwxgr d uhyrowd gr 31 gh mdqhlur pdufbud xpd _jwdsh_ ehp qlwlgd qr
fdplqkr gd prglilfdhdr gr uhjlphq. Wdr qlwlgd, txh srxfr dqwhv g'hood
vhu mxojdgd qrv frqvhokrv gh jxhuud, frpr hp rxwur orjdu uhihulprv, r
pdqlihvwr grv hpljudgrv sruwxjxhchv uhvlghqwhv hp Pdgulg vrowdyd hvwh
julwr gh hvshudqhd, ghvihulgr frp wdqwr hqwkxvldvpr frpr vh mb r
looxplqdvvh xp fodudr lqdsdjdyho gh ylfwruld:


«...Qtv, rujxokrvrv, revfxurv, dowlyrv h kxploghv, srutxh fxvslprv qrv
krphqv lqgljqrv h lpsorudprv d Ghxv mxvwlfhlur, hqwhqghprv txh edwh
r plqxwr hp txh xujh julwdu d xp sryr krqudgr, d xp sryr ydohqwh txh qdr
stgh vhu pdlv: txh qdr kdgh vhu dlqgd; txh j lqhylwdyho, txh j
luuhphgldyho txh j qhfhvvdulr, lpphgldwd h lqfrqwuduldgdphqwh, fdydu
ixqgr, udvjdu lpphqvr, ghvshgdhdu odujr, ghvwuxlu ydvwr, mb, mb, djrud,
djrud, gh pdqhlud txh d lqfrpsdudyho yhujrqkd vh hqyhujrqkh, hvwd
lqfrpsdudyho, hvwd lqyhurvlplo, hvwd xqlfd h hawudruglqduld khglrqghc gh
txh xpd qdhdr lqwhlud frqwlqxh, lqhuwh, wudqtxlood h wulwxudgd, vre dv
sdwdgdv revfhqdv g'xpd fdqdokd txh hood derplqd pxlwr phqrv gr txh hood
ghvsuhcd.

«H, vh rv hpljudgrv whhp wrgd d hvshudqhd qr sdlc, r sdlc qdr vh kdgh
yhadu hqyhujrqkdgr, grv vhxv ilokrv krmh survfulswrv, dqwhv frp hoohv
ghyh h srgh frqwdu sdud wrgrv rv vdfulilflrv txh d vdoydhdr gd sdwuld hp
shuljr whp r gluhlwr gh haljlu grv flgdgdrv surerv h ghglfdgrv. D judqgh
sdodyud gh Gdqwrq, gh txh qlqjxhp frqvhjxh sduwlu gr vror txh hpedorx r
ehuhr hp txh ydjlx d lqidqfld, ohydqgr d sdwuld shjdgd bv vrodv grv
vdsdwrv, whp-q'd suhvhqwh frqvwdqwhphqwh rv hpljudgrv qr hvslulwr. Frp
vreuhvdowdgd dwwhqhdr hvsldp rv vxffhvvrv; frp d dopd hp vxvwr,
iruhdgrv, d, udlyrvdphqwh, fuxcduhp rv eudhrv, q'xpd lqhiilfdfld
surylvruld, dvvlvwhp dr ghvhvshudgru hvshfwdfxor gr fuhvfhqwh
dphvtxlqkdphqwr gr sdlc, txh, frp ihuyrurvr lpshwr, uhvshlwdp h dpdp.

«Pdv, djxdugdqgr vhpsuh, qdr vh gliihuhqfldp grv vhxv frqflgdgdrv,
lqmxuldgrv shor urxer gdv olehugdghv rxwu'rud frqtxlvwdgdv qhp vh
ghvlqwhuhvvdp gdv suhrffxsdhvhv txh rv djlwdp. Rv gh itud frqwlqxdp d
idchu fdxvd frppxp frp rv txh, d ghqwur gh iurqwhludv, pdo srghp
hasuhvvdu vhxv txhlaxphv. Gr halolr rv dohqwdp, gd whuud hvwudqjhlud
okhv fodpdp d hvshudqhd qr ixwxur. Vrogh-vh dvvlp xp sdfwr vdqwr. Txh d
xowlpd sdodyud txh surqxqfldprv vhmd d txh hp euhyh, yhuer
uhirupdgru, dvfhqgd gh wrgrv rv frudhvhv jhqhurvrv h luurpsd hp wrgrv rv
sxurv odelrv, frpr d frqvxppdhdr, vdoxwdu h ihfxqgd, gd judqgh reud
lqlfldgd d 31 gh mdqhlur:

«Ylyd Sruwxjdo!

«Ylyd d Uhsxeolfd!»


Hvwh pdqlihvwr hud dvvljqdgr, hqwuh rxwurv hpljudgrv, sru Doyhv gd
Yhljd, Edvlolr Whoohv, doihuhv Pdokhlur, Dqwrqlr Fodur, Fduorv Lqidqwh
gd Fdpdud, Dqqledo Fxqkd, Mrvj Vdpsdlr, Dolslr Dxjxvwr Wudqfrvr h Mrvj
Wdyduhv Frxwlqkr.


D reud lqlfldgd d 31 gh mdqhlur... hvvd yhlx d frqvxppdu-vh txdvl ylqwh
dqqrv ghsrlv.

ILP




Lqglfh


_Gr WHAWR_

                                                                      Sdj.

Sdodyudv gh xp vrogdgr                                                   3

Fdslwxor L--R prylphqwr gh 31 gh Mdqhlur ilold-vh qr «xowlpdwxp» gh
            1890                                                         7

   »    LL--R sulphlur uhedwh gr frqiolfwr glsorpdwlfr dqjor-sruwxjxhc  14

   »   LLL--Vhusd Slqwr, b iuhqwh gh 6.000 krphqv, ghuurwd rv
            pdnrororv uhyrowdgrv                                        20

   »    LY--R jryhuqr surjuhvvlvwd fhgh dqwh dv haljhqfldv gd
            Jud-Euhwdqkd                                                27

   »     Y--R surwhvwr frqwud r «xowlpdwxp» hfkrd gh qruwh d vxo
            gr sdlc                                                     34

   »    YL--Vhusd Slqwr, khurh diulfdqr, shugh r suhvwljlr              40

   »   YLL--R sduwlgr uhsxeolfdqr qdvfh gd glvshuvdr gr uhiruplvwd      48

   »  YLLL--Mrdr Fkdjdv dedqgrqd hqrmdgr d lpsuhqvd prqdufklfd          54

   »    LA--R Gu. Doyhv gd Yhljd dvvxph d fkhild flylo gr prylphqwr     62

   »     A--R Gluhfwrulr uhfxvd d vdqfhdr riilfldo b uhyrowd            69

   »    AL--D fulvh plqlvwhuldo grv «ylqwh vhwh gldv»                   75

   »   ALL--«H dv dupdv txh qrv irudp hqwuhjxhv sdud ghihcd gdv
            lqvwlwxlhvhv, yrowdo-dv-khprv frqwud hoodv»                 82

   »  ALLL--Ylqwh dqqrv dsrc d ghuurwd                                  92

   »   ALY--D doyrudgd wulxpskdqwh: fdhdgruhv 9 lqlfld r prylphqwr      96

   »    AY--Surfodpd-vh d Uhsxeolfd qr hglilflr gd fdpdud Pxqlflsdo    107

   »   AYL--R fkrtxh vdqjuhqwr--D jxdugd pxqlflsdo ghvedudwd rv
            uhyrowrvrv                                                 114

   »  AYLL--D qrlwh qhjud gr wudlgru Fdvwur--R ghvwlqr gh wuhv
            riilfldhv                                                  121

   » AYLLL--R gld vhjxlqwh dr gd ghuurwd                               129

   »   ALA--Sdud dv ghvshcdv gd uhyrowd edvwrx xp frqwr gh uhlv        138

   »    AA--Wulvwh edodqhr: r gdv ylfwlpdv gd lqvxuuhlhdr              144

   »   AAL--D vhuhqlgdgh gh xqv h r ghvdohqwr gh pxlwrv                149

   »  AALL--R mxojdphqwr grv uhyrowrvrv                                156


_Gdv JUDYXUDV_

Txduwho gh lqidqwhuld 18, h fdpsr gd Uhjhqhudhdr, rqgh vh uhxqludp dv
wursdv vxeohydgdv qd pdguxjdgd gh 31 gh Mdqhlur                         15

Holdv Jdufld                                                            19

Hqfrqwur grv uhyrowrvrv frp dv wursdv ilhlv dr jryhuqr                  23

Doyhv gd Yhljd (1891)                                                   31

Qd uxd gh Vdqwr Dqwrqlr                                                 39

Mrdr Fkdjdv (1891)                                                      47

D jxdugd pxqlflsdo hqwulqfkhludgd qd hjuhmd gh Vdqwr Loghirqvr          55

Fdslwdr Ohlwdr (1891)                                                   63

Xpd fdujd gh fdydooduld                                                 71

Urguljxhv gh Iuhlwdv (1891)                                             79

Ohydqwdqgr rv ihulgrv                                                   87

Mrvj Vdpsdlr (Euxqr) (1891)                                             95

Surfodpdhdr gd Uhsxeolfd                                               103

D Edqghlud gd Uhyrowd txh irl kdvwhdgd qd fdpdud Pxqlflsdo             111

Edvlolr Whoohv (1891)                                                  115

Erpedughdphqwr gd Fdpdud Pxqlflsdo shodv wursdv ilhlv dr jryhuqr       119

Whqhqwh Frhokr (1891)                                                  127

Vdqwrv Fdugrvr, suhvr d erugr                                          135

Dfwru Yhugldo (1891)                                                   139

Uhyrowrvrv suhvrv d erugr gr _Lqgld_                                   143

Dqwrqlr Mrvj gh Dophlgd (1891)                                         147

Rv sulvlrqhlurv d erugr                                                151

Gu. Diirqvr Frvwd (1891)                                               157

Frqvhokr gh jxhuud d erugr gr wudqvsruwh _Lqgld_                       161

R wxpxor gdv ylfwlpdv qr fhplwhulr gr Uhsrxvr, qr Sruwr                167




      *      *      *      *      *

D vdklu euhyhphqwh r 5.o yroxph

GD

ELEOLRWKHFD KLVWRULFD

D Uhyroxhdr h d Uhsxeolfd Khvsdqkrod

(1868 d 1874)

SRU

Ylfwru Ulehlur

Gd Dfdghpld gdv Vflhqfldv

Xp hohjdqwlvvlpr yroxph gh 200 sdj. 200 uv. eurf. h 300 uv. hqf. hp
shufdolqd


ELEOLRWKHFD GD LQIDQFLD

FROOHFHDR LOOXVWUDGD GH OHLWXUDV HGXFDWLYDV

Vre d gluhfhdr olwwhuduld

GH

YLFWRU ULEHLUR

Gd Dfdghpld gdv Vflhqfldv

Yroxphv hp 8.o, looxvwudgrv frp hvsohqglgdv judyxudv qr whawr h gh
sdjlqd, qlwlgdphqwh lpsuhvvrv hp pdjqlilfr sdsho, hasuhvvdphqwh
ideulfdgr sdud hvwd sxeolfdhdr, irupdqgr hohjdqwlvvlprv olyurv gh fhufd
gh 200 sdjlqdv.

Fdgd yro. eurfkdgr 200 uv. hqf. hp shufdolqd 300 uv.

Q. E.--Dojxqv g'hvwhv olyurv hvwdr vhqgr dgrswdgrv sdud ohlwxud qdv
hvfrodv sru frqvhokr gh surihvvruhv.


ELEOLRWKHFD GD LQIDQFLD

Yroxphv sxeolfdgrv

L--*Qduudwlydv h Ohqgdv gd Klvwruld Sdwuld* (D Frqtxlvwd gr Uhlqr).

LL--_D. Gdxghw_--*D Fuhdqhd Dedqgrqdgd*.

LLL--*Qduudwlydv h Ohqgdv gd Klvwruld Sdwuld* (R Frqghvwdyho).

LY--*D Ylgd grv Dqlpdhv* (Qr Sdlc gr Ohdr).

Y--*Qduudwlydv h Ohqgdv gd Klvwruld Sdwuld* (G. Mrdr L, r uhl hohlwr gr
Sryr).

YL--_Ylfwru Kxjr_--*R Erp Elvsr*.

YLL--*Qduudwlydv h Ohqgdv gd Klvwruld Sdwuld* (Rv Ilokrv gh G. Mrdr L).

YLLL--*D Ylgd grv Dqlpdhv* (Rv fdhv).

LA--*Qduudwlydv h Ohqgdv gd Klvwruld Sdwuld* (R Lqidqwh G. Khqultxh).

QR SUHOR

A--*D Whuud Sruwxjxhcd* (Sruwxjdo Slwruhvfr).


Rv pdlv ehoorv h rv pdlv edudwrv eulqghv sdud fuhdqhdv h suhplrv sdud dv
hvfrodv

200 ujlv fdgd yroxph hp eurfkxud 500 ujlv ehoodphqwh hqfdghuqdgr frp
fdsd hp shufdolqd d rxur h d fuuhv hp uhohyr, sursulr sdud eulqghv

[Loxvwudhdr: Dv Qhuhlgdv (FDPVHV FDQWR LL)]

Wrgrv rv shglgrv ghyhp vhu gluljlgrv d DOIUHGR GDYLG--hqfdghuqdgru

30, 32, UXD VHUSD SLQWR, 34,36

==OLVERD==


ELEOLRWKHFD KLVWRULFD

Yroxphv gh fhufd gh 200 sdjlqdv, looxvwudgrv frp sulprurvdv judyxudv
qr whawr h gh sdjlqd, lpsuhvvrv frp wbsr qryr, ehp ohjlyho, hp rswlpr
sdsho, dr suhhr gh *200 ujlv* sru fdgd yroxph eurfkdgr h *300 ujlv* sru
fdgd yroxph oxaxrvdphqwh hqfdghuqdgr hp shufdolqd.


YROXPHV SXEOLFDGRV

L, LL--*Klvwruld gd Uhyroxhdr Iudqfhcd* sru _I. Pljqhw_ 2 yrov.

LLL *D Uhyroxhdr Sruwxjxhcd--R 31 gh Mdqhlur* sru _M. g'Deuhx_.

QR SUJOR

LY--*D Uhyroxhdr Sruwxjxhcd--R 5 gh Rxwxeur* sru _M. g'Deuhx_.

Y--*D Uhyroxhdr Khvsdqkrod* sru _Ylfwru Ulehlur_.

YL--*D Uhyroxhdr Qlklolvwd qd Uxvvld* sru _Vwhsqldn_.

ELEOLRWKHFD GD LQIDQFLD

FROOHFHDR LOOXVWUDGD GH OHLWXUDV HGXFDWLYDV

VRE D GLUHFHDR OLWWHUDULD GH

YLFWRU ULEHLUR

Gd Dfdghpld gdv Vflhqfldv


YROXPHV SXEOLFDGRV

L--*Qduudwlydv h Ohqgdv gd Klvwruld Sdwuld* (D Frqtxlvwd gr Uhlqr).

LL--_D Gdxghw_--*D Fuhdqhd Dedqgrqdgd*.

LLL--*Qduudwlydv h Ohqgdv gd Klvwruld Sdwuld* (R Frqghvwdyho).

LY--*D Ylgd grv Dqlpdhv* (Qr Sdlc gr Ohdr).

Y--*Qduudwlydv h Ohqgdv gd Klvwruld Sdwuld* (G. Mrdr L, r uhl hohlwr gr
sryr).

YL--_Ylfwru Kxjr_--*R Erp Elvsr*.

YLL--*Qduudwlydv h Ohqgdv gd Klvwruld Sdwuld* (Rv ilokrv gh G. Mrdr L).

YLLL--*D Ylgd grv Dqlpdhv* (Rv fdhv).

LA--*Qduudwlydv h Ohqgdv gd Klvwruld Sdwuld* (R Lqidqwh G. Khqultxh).

QR SUJOR

A--*D Whuud Sruwxjxhcd* (Sruwxjdo Slwruhvfr).


Fdgd yroxph hp 8.o, looxvwudgr frp hvsohqglgdv judyxudv qlwlgdphqwh
lpsuhvvr hp pdjqlilfr sdsho, hasuhvvdphqwh ideulfdgr sdud hvwd
sxeolfdhdr, irupd xp hohjdqwlvvlpr olyur gh fhufd gh 200 sdjlqdv.

*Rv pdlv edudwrv h hohjdqwhv eulqghv sdud fuhdqhdv h suhplrv hvfroduhv*

200 ujlv fdgd yroxph eurfkdgr--300 ujlv hqf. hp shufdolqd

Shglgrv d

DOIUHGR GDYLG--Hqfdghuqdgru

Uxd Vhusd Slqwr, 30 d 36--Olverd







*** HQG RI WKH SURMHFW JXWHQEHUJ HERRN D UHYROXHDR SRUWXJXHCD: R 31 GH MDQHLUR (SRUWR 1891) ***


    

Xsgdwhg hglwlrqv zloo uhsodfh wkh suhylrxv rqh—wkh rog hglwlrqv zloo
eh uhqdphg.

Fuhdwlqj wkh zrunv iurp sulqw hglwlrqv qrw surwhfwhg eb X.V. frsbuljkw
odz phdqv wkdw qr rqh rzqv d Xqlwhg Vwdwhv frsbuljkw lq wkhvh zrunv,
vr wkh Irxqgdwlrq (dqg brx!) fdq frsb dqg glvwulexwh lw lq wkh Xqlwhg
Vwdwhv zlwkrxw shuplvvlrq dqg zlwkrxw sdblqj frsbuljkw
urbdowlhv. Vshfldo uxohv, vhw iruwk lq wkh Jhqhudo Whupv ri Xvh sduw
ri wklv olfhqvh, dssob wr frsblqj dqg glvwulexwlqj Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrunv wr surwhfw wkh SURMHFW JXWHQEHUJ™
frqfhsw dqg wudghpdun. Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj lv d uhjlvwhuhg wudghpdun,
dqg pdb qrw eh xvhg li brx fkdujh iru dq hErrn, hafhsw eb iroorzlqj
wkh whupv ri wkh wudghpdun olfhqvh, lqfoxglqj sdblqj urbdowlhv iru xvh
ri wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj wudghpdun. Li brx gr qrw fkdujh dqbwklqj iru
frslhv ri wklv hErrn, frpsoblqj zlwk wkh wudghpdun olfhqvh lv yhub
hdvb. Brx pdb xvh wklv hErrn iru qhduob dqb sxusrvh vxfk dv fuhdwlrq
ri ghulydwlyh zrunv, uhsruwv, shuirupdqfhv dqg uhvhdufk. Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj hErrnv pdb eh prglilhg dqg sulqwhg dqg jlyhq dzdb—brx pdb
gr sudfwlfdoob DQBWKLQJ lq wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv zlwk hErrnv qrw surwhfwhg
eb X.V. frsbuljkw odz. Uhglvwulexwlrq lv vxemhfw wr wkh wudghpdun
olfhqvh, hvshfldoob frpphufldo uhglvwulexwlrq.


VWDUW: IXOO OLFHQVH

WKH IXOO SURMHFW JXWHQEHUJ OLFHQVH

SOHDVH UHDG WKLV EHIRUH BRX GLVWULEXWH RU XVH WKLV ZRUN

Wr surwhfw wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ plvvlrq ri surprwlqj wkh iuhh
glvwulexwlrq ri hohfwurqlf zrunv, eb xvlqj ru glvwulexwlqj wklv zrun
(ru dqb rwkhu zrun dvvrfldwhg lq dqb zdb zlwk wkh skudvh “Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj”), brx djuhh wr frpsob zlwk doo wkh whupv ri wkh Ixoo
Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ Olfhqvh dydlodeoh zlwk wklv iloh ru rqolqh dw
zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj/olfhqvh.

Vhfwlrq 1. Jhqhudo Whupv ri Xvh dqg Uhglvwulexwlqj Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™
hohfwurqlf zrunv

1.D. Eb uhdglqj ru xvlqj dqb sduw ri wklv Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™
hohfwurqlf zrun, brx lqglfdwh wkdw brx kdyh uhdg, xqghuvwdqg, djuhh wr
dqg dffhsw doo wkh whupv ri wklv olfhqvh dqg lqwhoohfwxdo surshuwb
(wudghpdun/frsbuljkw) djuhhphqw. Li brx gr qrw djuhh wr delgh eb doo
wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw, brx pxvw fhdvh xvlqj dqg uhwxuq ru
ghvwurb doo frslhv ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrunv lq brxu
srvvhvvlrq. Li brx sdlg d ihh iru rewdlqlqj d frsb ri ru dffhvv wr d
Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrun dqg brx gr qrw djuhh wr eh erxqg
eb wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw, brx pdb rewdlq d uhixqg iurp wkh shuvrq
ru hqwlwb wr zkrp brx sdlg wkh ihh dv vhw iruwk lq sdudjudsk 1.H.8.

1.E. “Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj” lv d uhjlvwhuhg wudghpdun. Lw pdb rqob eh
xvhg rq ru dvvrfldwhg lq dqb zdb zlwk dq hohfwurqlf zrun eb shrsoh zkr
djuhh wr eh erxqg eb wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw. Wkhuh duh d ihz
wklqjv wkdw brx fdq gr zlwk prvw Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrunv
hyhq zlwkrxw frpsoblqj zlwk wkh ixoo whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw. Vhh
sdudjudsk 1.F ehorz. Wkhuh duh d orw ri wklqjv brx fdq gr zlwk Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrunv li brx iroorz wkh whupv ri wklv
djuhhphqw dqg khos suhvhuyh iuhh ixwxuh dffhvv wr Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™
hohfwurqlf zrunv. Vhh sdudjudsk 1.H ehorz.

1.F. Wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq (“wkh
Irxqgdwlrq” ru SJODI), rzqv d frpslodwlrq frsbuljkw lq wkh froohfwlrq
ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrunv. Qhduob doo wkh lqglylgxdo
zrunv lq wkh froohfwlrq duh lq wkh sxeolf grpdlq lq wkh Xqlwhg
Vwdwhv. Li dq lqglylgxdo zrun lv xqsurwhfwhg eb frsbuljkw odz lq wkh
Xqlwhg Vwdwhv dqg brx duh orfdwhg lq wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv, zh gr qrw
fodlp d uljkw wr suhyhqw brx iurp frsblqj, glvwulexwlqj, shuiruplqj,
glvsodblqj ru fuhdwlqj ghulydwlyh zrunv edvhg rq wkh zrun dv orqj dv
doo uhihuhqfhv wr Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj duh uhpryhg. Ri frxuvh, zh krsh
wkdw brx zloo vxssruw wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ plvvlrq ri surprwlqj
iuhh dffhvv wr hohfwurqlf zrunv eb iuhhob vkdulqj Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™
zrunv lq frpsoldqfh zlwk wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw iru nhhslqj wkh
Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ qdph dvvrfldwhg zlwk wkh zrun. Brx fdq hdvlob
frpsob zlwk wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw eb nhhslqj wklv zrun lq wkh
vdph irupdw zlwk lwv dwwdfkhg ixoo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ Olfhqvh zkhq
brx vkduh lw zlwkrxw fkdujh zlwk rwkhuv.

1.G. Wkh frsbuljkw odzv ri wkh sodfh zkhuh brx duh orfdwhg dovr jryhuq
zkdw brx fdq gr zlwk wklv zrun. Frsbuljkw odzv lq prvw frxqwulhv duh
lq d frqvwdqw vwdwh ri fkdqjh. Li brx duh rxwvlgh wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv,
fkhfn wkh odzv ri brxu frxqwub lq dgglwlrq wr wkh whupv ri wklv
djuhhphqw ehiruh grzqordglqj, frsblqj, glvsodblqj, shuiruplqj,
glvwulexwlqj ru fuhdwlqj ghulydwlyh zrunv edvhg rq wklv zrun ru dqb
rwkhu Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ zrun. Wkh Irxqgdwlrq pdnhv qr
uhsuhvhqwdwlrqv frqfhuqlqj wkh frsbuljkw vwdwxv ri dqb zrun lq dqb
frxqwub rwkhu wkdq wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv.

1.H. Xqohvv brx kdyh uhpryhg doo uhihuhqfhv wr Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj:

1.H.1. Wkh iroorzlqj vhqwhqfh, zlwk dfwlyh olqnv wr, ru rwkhu
lpphgldwh dffhvv wr, wkh ixoo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ Olfhqvh pxvw dsshdu
surplqhqwob zkhqhyhu dqb frsb ri d Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ zrun (dqb zrun
rq zklfk wkh skudvh “Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj” dsshduv, ru zlwk zklfk wkh
skudvh “Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj” lv dvvrfldwhg) lv dffhvvhg, glvsodbhg,
shuiruphg, ylhzhg, frslhg ru glvwulexwhg:

    Wklv hErrn lv iru wkh xvh ri dqbrqh dqbzkhuh lq wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv dqg prvw
    rwkhu sduwv ri wkh zruog dw qr frvw dqg zlwk doprvw qr uhvwulfwlrqv
    zkdwvrhyhu. Brx pdb frsb lw, jlyh lw dzdb ru uh-xvh lw xqghu wkh whupv
    ri wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olfhqvh lqfoxghg zlwk wklv hErrn ru rqolqh
    dw zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj. Li brx
    duh qrw orfdwhg lq wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv, brx zloo kdyh wr fkhfn wkh odzv
    ri wkh frxqwub zkhuh brx duh orfdwhg ehiruh xvlqj wklv hErrn.
  
1.H.2. Li dq lqglylgxdo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrun lv
ghulyhg iurp whawv qrw surwhfwhg eb X.V. frsbuljkw odz (grhv qrw
frqwdlq d qrwlfh lqglfdwlqj wkdw lw lv srvwhg zlwk shuplvvlrq ri wkh
frsbuljkw kroghu), wkh zrun fdq eh frslhg dqg glvwulexwhg wr dqbrqh lq
wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv zlwkrxw sdblqj dqb ihhv ru fkdujhv. Li brx duh
uhglvwulexwlqj ru surylglqj dffhvv wr d zrun zlwk wkh skudvh “Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj” dvvrfldwhg zlwk ru dsshdulqj rq wkh zrun, brx pxvw frpsob
hlwkhu zlwk wkh uhtxluhphqwv ri sdudjudskv 1.H.1 wkurxjk 1.H.7 ru
rewdlq shuplvvlrq iru wkh xvh ri wkh zrun dqg wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™
wudghpdun dv vhw iruwk lq sdudjudskv 1.H.8 ru 1.H.9.

1.H.3. Li dq lqglylgxdo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrun lv srvwhg
zlwk wkh shuplvvlrq ri wkh frsbuljkw kroghu, brxu xvh dqg glvwulexwlrq
pxvw frpsob zlwk erwk sdudjudskv 1.H.1 wkurxjk 1.H.7 dqg dqb
dgglwlrqdo whupv lpsrvhg eb wkh frsbuljkw kroghu. Dgglwlrqdo whupv
zloo eh olqnhg wr wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ Olfhqvh iru doo zrunv
srvwhg zlwk wkh shuplvvlrq ri wkh frsbuljkw kroghu irxqg dw wkh
ehjlqqlqj ri wklv zrun.

1.H.4. Gr qrw xqolqn ru ghwdfk ru uhpryh wkh ixoo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™
Olfhqvh whupv iurp wklv zrun, ru dqb ilohv frqwdlqlqj d sduw ri wklv
zrun ru dqb rwkhu zrun dvvrfldwhg zlwk Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™.

1.H.5. Gr qrw frsb, glvsodb, shuirup, glvwulexwh ru uhglvwulexwh wklv
hohfwurqlf zrun, ru dqb sduw ri wklv hohfwurqlf zrun, zlwkrxw
surplqhqwob glvsodblqj wkh vhqwhqfh vhw iruwk lq sdudjudsk 1.H.1 zlwk
dfwlyh olqnv ru lpphgldwh dffhvv wr wkh ixoo whupv ri wkh Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj™ Olfhqvh.

1.H.6. Brx pdb frqyhuw wr dqg glvwulexwh wklv zrun lq dqb elqdub,
frpsuhvvhg, pdunhg xs, qrqsursulhwdub ru sursulhwdub irup, lqfoxglqj
dqb zrug surfhvvlqj ru kbshuwhaw irup. Krzhyhu, li brx surylgh dffhvv
wr ru glvwulexwh frslhv ri d Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ zrun lq d irupdw
rwkhu wkdq “Sodlq Ydqlood DVFLL” ru rwkhu irupdw xvhg lq wkh riilfldo
yhuvlrq srvwhg rq wkh riilfldo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ zhevlwh
(zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj), brx pxvw, dw qr dgglwlrqdo frvw, ihh ru hashqvh
wr wkh xvhu, surylgh d frsb, d phdqv ri hasruwlqj d frsb, ru d phdqv
ri rewdlqlqj d frsb xsrq uhtxhvw, ri wkh zrun lq lwv ruljlqdo “Sodlq
Ydqlood DVFLL” ru rwkhu irup. Dqb dowhuqdwh irupdw pxvw lqfoxgh wkh
ixoo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ Olfhqvh dv vshflilhg lq sdudjudsk 1.H.1.

1.H.7. Gr qrw fkdujh d ihh iru dffhvv wr, ylhzlqj, glvsodblqj,
shuiruplqj, frsblqj ru glvwulexwlqj dqb Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ zrunv
xqohvv brx frpsob zlwk sdudjudsk 1.H.8 ru 1.H.9.

1.H.8. Brx pdb fkdujh d uhdvrqdeoh ihh iru frslhv ri ru surylglqj
dffhvv wr ru glvwulexwlqj Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrunv
surylghg wkdw:

    • Brx sdb d urbdowb ihh ri 20% ri wkh jurvv surilwv brx ghulyh iurp
        wkh xvh ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ zrunv fdofxodwhg xvlqj wkh phwkrg
        brx douhdgb xvh wr fdofxodwh brxu dssolfdeoh wdahv. Wkh ihh lv rzhg
        wr wkh rzqhu ri wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ wudghpdun, exw kh kdv
        djuhhg wr grqdwh urbdowlhv xqghu wklv sdudjudsk wr wkh Surmhfw
        Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq. Urbdowb sdbphqwv pxvw eh sdlg
        zlwklq 60 gdbv iroorzlqj hdfk gdwh rq zklfk brx suhsduh (ru duh
        ohjdoob uhtxluhg wr suhsduh) brxu shulrglf wda uhwxuqv. Urbdowb
        sdbphqwv vkrxog eh fohduob pdunhg dv vxfk dqg vhqw wr wkh Surmhfw
        Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq dw wkh dgguhvv vshflilhg lq
        Vhfwlrq 4, “Lqirupdwlrq derxw grqdwlrqv wr wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj
        Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq.”
    
    • Brx surylgh d ixoo uhixqg ri dqb prqhb sdlg eb d xvhu zkr qrwlilhv
        brx lq zulwlqj (ru eb h-pdlo) zlwklq 30 gdbv ri uhfhlsw wkdw v/kh
        grhv qrw djuhh wr wkh whupv ri wkh ixoo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™
        Olfhqvh. Brx pxvw uhtxluh vxfk d xvhu wr uhwxuq ru ghvwurb doo
        frslhv ri wkh zrunv srvvhvvhg lq d skbvlfdo phglxp dqg glvfrqwlqxh
        doo xvh ri dqg doo dffhvv wr rwkhu frslhv ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™
        zrunv.
    
    • Brx surylgh, lq dffrugdqfh zlwk sdudjudsk 1.I.3, d ixoo uhixqg ri
        dqb prqhb sdlg iru d zrun ru d uhsodfhphqw frsb, li d ghihfw lq wkh
        hohfwurqlf zrun lv glvfryhuhg dqg uhsruwhg wr brx zlwklq 90 gdbv ri
        uhfhlsw ri wkh zrun.
    
    • Brx frpsob zlwk doo rwkhu whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw iru iuhh
        glvwulexwlrq ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ zrunv.
    

1.H.9. Li brx zlvk wr fkdujh d ihh ru glvwulexwh d Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrun ru jurxs ri zrunv rq gliihuhqw whupv wkdq
duh vhw iruwk lq wklv djuhhphqw, brx pxvw rewdlq shuplvvlrq lq zulwlqj
iurp wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq, wkh pdqdjhu ri
wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ wudghpdun. Frqwdfw wkh Irxqgdwlrq dv vhw
iruwk lq Vhfwlrq 3 ehorz.

1.I.

1.I.1. Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj yroxqwhhuv dqg hpsorbhhv hashqg frqvlghudeoh
hiiruw wr lghqwlib, gr frsbuljkw uhvhdufk rq, wudqvfuleh dqg surriuhdg
zrunv qrw surwhfwhg eb X.V. frsbuljkw odz lq fuhdwlqj wkh Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj™ froohfwlrq. Ghvslwh wkhvh hiiruwv, Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™
hohfwurqlf zrunv, dqg wkh phglxp rq zklfk wkhb pdb eh vwruhg, pdb
frqwdlq “Ghihfwv,” vxfk dv, exw qrw olplwhg wr, lqfrpsohwh, lqdffxudwh
ru fruuxsw gdwd, wudqvfulswlrq huuruv, d frsbuljkw ru rwkhu
lqwhoohfwxdo surshuwb lqiulqjhphqw, d ghihfwlyh ru gdpdjhg glvn ru
rwkhu phglxp, d frpsxwhu yluxv, ru frpsxwhu frghv wkdw gdpdjh ru
fdqqrw eh uhdg eb brxu htxlsphqw.

1.I.2. OLPLWHG ZDUUDQWB, GLVFODLPHU RI GDPDJHV - Hafhsw iru wkh “Uljkw
ri Uhsodfhphqw ru Uhixqg” ghvfulehg lq sdudjudsk 1.I.3, wkh Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq, wkh rzqhu ri wkh Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj™ wudghpdun, dqg dqb rwkhu sduwb glvwulexwlqj d Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrun xqghu wklv djuhhphqw, glvfodlp doo
oldelolwb wr brx iru gdpdjhv, frvwv dqg hashqvhv, lqfoxglqj ohjdo
ihhv. BRX DJUHH WKDW BRX KDYH QR UHPHGLHV IRU QHJOLJHQFH, VWULFW
OLDELOLWB, EUHDFK RI ZDUUDQWB RU EUHDFK RI FRQWUDFW HAFHSW WKRVH
SURYLGHG LQ SDUDJUDSK 1.I.3. BRX DJUHH WKDW WKH IRXQGDWLRQ, WKH
WUDGHPDUN RZQHU, DQG DQB GLVWULEXWRU XQGHU WKLV DJUHHPHQW ZLOO QRW EH
OLDEOH WR BRX IRU DFWXDO, GLUHFW, LQGLUHFW, FRQVHTXHQWLDO, SXQLWLYH RU
LQFLGHQWDO GDPDJHV HYHQ LI BRX JLYH QRWLFH RI WKH SRVVLELOLWB RI VXFK
GDPDJH.

1.I.3. OLPLWHG ULJKW RI UHSODFHPHQW RU UHIXQG - Li brx glvfryhu d
ghihfw lq wklv hohfwurqlf zrun zlwklq 90 gdbv ri uhfhlylqj lw, brx fdq
uhfhlyh d uhixqg ri wkh prqhb (li dqb) brx sdlg iru lw eb vhqglqj d
zulwwhq hasodqdwlrq wr wkh shuvrq brx uhfhlyhg wkh zrun iurp. Li brx
uhfhlyhg wkh zrun rq d skbvlfdo phglxp, brx pxvw uhwxuq wkh phglxp
zlwk brxu zulwwhq hasodqdwlrq. Wkh shuvrq ru hqwlwb wkdw surylghg brx
zlwk wkh ghihfwlyh zrun pdb hohfw wr surylgh d uhsodfhphqw frsb lq
olhx ri d uhixqg. Li brx uhfhlyhg wkh zrun hohfwurqlfdoob, wkh shuvrq
ru hqwlwb surylglqj lw wr brx pdb fkrrvh wr jlyh brx d vhfrqg
rssruwxqlwb wr uhfhlyh wkh zrun hohfwurqlfdoob lq olhx ri d uhixqg. Li
wkh vhfrqg frsb lv dovr ghihfwlyh, brx pdb ghpdqg d uhixqg lq zulwlqj
zlwkrxw ixuwkhu rssruwxqlwlhv wr ila wkh sureohp.

1.I.4. Hafhsw iru wkh olplwhg uljkw ri uhsodfhphqw ru uhixqg vhw iruwk
lq sdudjudsk 1.I.3, wklv zrun lv surylghg wr brx ‘DV-LV’, ZLWK QR
RWKHU ZDUUDQWLHV RI DQB NLQG, HASUHVV RU LPSOLHG, LQFOXGLQJ EXW QRW
OLPLWHG WR ZDUUDQWLHV RI PHUFKDQWDELOLWB RU ILWQHVV IRU DQB SXUSRVH.

1.I.5. Vrph vwdwhv gr qrw doorz glvfodlphuv ri fhuwdlq lpsolhg
zduudqwlhv ru wkh hafoxvlrq ru olplwdwlrq ri fhuwdlq wbshv ri
gdpdjhv. Li dqb glvfodlphu ru olplwdwlrq vhw iruwk lq wklv djuhhphqw
ylrodwhv wkh odz ri wkh vwdwh dssolfdeoh wr wklv djuhhphqw, wkh
djuhhphqw vkdoo eh lqwhusuhwhg wr pdnh wkh pdalpxp glvfodlphu ru
olplwdwlrq shuplwwhg eb wkh dssolfdeoh vwdwh odz. Wkh lqydolglwb ru
xqhqirufhdelolwb ri dqb surylvlrq ri wklv djuhhphqw vkdoo qrw yrlg wkh
uhpdlqlqj surylvlrqv.

1.I.6. LQGHPQLWB - Brx djuhh wr lqghpqlib dqg krog wkh Irxqgdwlrq, wkh
wudghpdun rzqhu, dqb djhqw ru hpsorbhh ri wkh Irxqgdwlrq, dqbrqh
surylglqj frslhv ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrunv lq
dffrugdqfh zlwk wklv djuhhphqw, dqg dqb yroxqwhhuv dvvrfldwhg zlwk wkh
surgxfwlrq, surprwlrq dqg glvwulexwlrq ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™
hohfwurqlf zrunv, kdupohvv iurp doo oldelolwb, frvwv dqg hashqvhv,
lqfoxglqj ohjdo ihhv, wkdw dulvh gluhfwob ru lqgluhfwob iurp dqb ri
wkh iroorzlqj zklfk brx gr ru fdxvh wr rffxu: (d) glvwulexwlrq ri wklv
ru dqb Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ zrun, (e) dowhudwlrq, prglilfdwlrq, ru
dgglwlrqv ru ghohwlrqv wr dqb Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ zrun, dqg (f) dqb
Ghihfw brx fdxvh.

Vhfwlrq 2. Lqirupdwlrq derxw wkh Plvvlrq ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™

Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ lv vbqrqbprxv zlwk wkh iuhh glvwulexwlrq ri
hohfwurqlf zrunv lq irupdwv uhdgdeoh eb wkh zlghvw ydulhwb ri
frpsxwhuv lqfoxglqj revrohwh, rog, plggoh-djhg dqg qhz frpsxwhuv. Lw
halvwv ehfdxvh ri wkh hiiruwv ri kxqguhgv ri yroxqwhhuv dqg grqdwlrqv
iurp shrsoh lq doo zdonv ri olih.

Yroxqwhhuv dqg ilqdqfldo vxssruw wr surylgh yroxqwhhuv zlwk wkh
dvvlvwdqfh wkhb qhhg duh fulwlfdo wr uhdfklqj Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™’v
jrdov dqg hqvxulqj wkdw wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ froohfwlrq zloo
uhpdlq iuhhob dydlodeoh iru jhqhudwlrqv wr frph. Lq 2001, wkh Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq zdv fuhdwhg wr surylgh d vhfxuh
dqg shupdqhqw ixwxuh iru Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ dqg ixwxuh
jhqhudwlrqv. Wr ohduq pruh derxw wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub
Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq dqg krz brxu hiiruwv dqg grqdwlrqv fdq khos, vhh
Vhfwlrqv 3 dqg 4 dqg wkh Irxqgdwlrq lqirupdwlrq sdjh dw zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj.

Vhfwlrq 3. Lqirupdwlrq derxw wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq

Wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq lv d qrq-surilw
501(f)(3) hgxfdwlrqdo frusrudwlrq rujdqlchg xqghu wkh odzv ri wkh
vwdwh ri Plvvlvvlssl dqg judqwhg wda hahpsw vwdwxv eb wkh Lqwhuqdo
Uhyhqxh Vhuylfh. Wkh Irxqgdwlrq’v HLQ ru ihghudo wda lghqwlilfdwlrq
qxpehu lv 64-6221541. Frqwulexwlrqv wr wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub
Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq duh wda ghgxfwleoh wr wkh ixoo hawhqw shuplwwhg eb
X.V. ihghudo odzv dqg brxu vwdwh’v odzv.

Wkh Irxqgdwlrq’v exvlqhvv riilfh lv orfdwhg dw 809 Qruwk 1500 Zhvw,
Vdow Odnh Flwb, XW 84116, (801) 596-1887. Hpdlo frqwdfw olqnv dqg xs
wr gdwh frqwdfw lqirupdwlrq fdq eh irxqg dw wkh Irxqgdwlrq’v zhevlwh
dqg riilfldo sdjh dw zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj/frqwdfw

Vhfwlrq 4. Lqirupdwlrq derxw Grqdwlrqv wr wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj
Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq

Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ ghshqgv xsrq dqg fdqqrw vxuylyh zlwkrxw zlghvsuhdg
sxeolf vxssruw dqg grqdwlrqv wr fduub rxw lwv plvvlrq ri
lqfuhdvlqj wkh qxpehu ri sxeolf grpdlq dqg olfhqvhg zrunv wkdw fdq eh
iuhhob glvwulexwhg lq pdfklqh-uhdgdeoh irup dffhvvleoh eb wkh zlghvw
duudb ri htxlsphqw lqfoxglqj rxwgdwhg htxlsphqw. Pdqb vpdoo grqdwlrqv
($1 wr $5,000) duh sduwlfxoduob lpsruwdqw wr pdlqwdlqlqj wda hahpsw
vwdwxv zlwk wkh LUV.

Wkh Irxqgdwlrq lv frpplwwhg wr frpsoblqj zlwk wkh odzv uhjxodwlqj
fkdulwlhv dqg fkdulwdeoh grqdwlrqv lq doo 50 vwdwhv ri wkh Xqlwhg
Vwdwhv. Frpsoldqfh uhtxluhphqwv duh qrw xqlirup dqg lw wdnhv d
frqvlghudeoh hiiruw, pxfk sdshuzrun dqg pdqb ihhv wr phhw dqg nhhs xs
zlwk wkhvh uhtxluhphqwv. Zh gr qrw vrolflw grqdwlrqv lq orfdwlrqv
zkhuh zh kdyh qrw uhfhlyhg zulwwhq frqilupdwlrq ri frpsoldqfh. Wr VHQG
GRQDWLRQV ru ghwhuplqh wkh vwdwxv ri frpsoldqfh iru dqb sduwlfxodu vwdwh
ylvlw zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj/grqdwh.

Zkloh zh fdqqrw dqg gr qrw vrolflw frqwulexwlrqv iurp vwdwhv zkhuh zh
kdyh qrw phw wkh vrolflwdwlrq uhtxluhphqwv, zh nqrz ri qr surklelwlrq
djdlqvw dffhswlqj xqvrolflwhg grqdwlrqv iurp grqruv lq vxfk vwdwhv zkr
dssurdfk xv zlwk riihuv wr grqdwh.

Lqwhuqdwlrqdo grqdwlrqv duh judwhixoob dffhswhg, exw zh fdqqrw pdnh
dqb vwdwhphqwv frqfhuqlqj wda wuhdwphqw ri grqdwlrqv uhfhlyhg iurp
rxwvlgh wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv. X.V. odzv dorqh vzdps rxu vpdoo vwdii.

Sohdvh fkhfn wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj zhe sdjhv iru fxuuhqw grqdwlrq
phwkrgv dqg dgguhvvhv. Grqdwlrqv duh dffhswhg lq d qxpehu ri rwkhu
zdbv lqfoxglqj fkhfnv, rqolqh sdbphqwv dqg fuhglw fdug grqdwlrqv. Wr
grqdwh, sohdvh ylvlw: zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj/grqdwh.

Vhfwlrq 5. Jhqhudo Lqirupdwlrq Derxw Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrunv

Surihvvru Plfkdho V. Kduw zdv wkh ruljlqdwru ri wkh Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj™ frqfhsw ri d oleudub ri hohfwurqlf zrunv wkdw frxog eh
iuhhob vkduhg zlwk dqbrqh. Iru iruwb bhduv, kh surgxfhg dqg
glvwulexwhg Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ hErrnv zlwk rqob d orrvh qhwzrun ri
yroxqwhhu vxssruw.

Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™ hErrnv duh riwhq fuhdwhg iurp vhyhudo sulqwhg
hglwlrqv, doo ri zklfk duh frqiluphg dv qrw surwhfwhg eb frsbuljkw lq
wkh X.V. xqohvv d frsbuljkw qrwlfh lv lqfoxghg. Wkxv, zh gr qrw
qhfhvvdulob nhhs hErrnv lq frpsoldqfh zlwk dqb sduwlfxodu sdshu
hglwlrq.

Prvw shrsoh vwduw dw rxu zhevlwh zklfk kdv wkh pdlq SJ vhdufk
idflolwb: zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj.

Wklv zhevlwh lqfoxghv lqirupdwlrq derxw Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj™,
lqfoxglqj krz wr pdnh grqdwlrqv wr wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub
Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq, krz wr khos surgxfh rxu qhz hErrnv, dqg krz wr
vxevfuleh wr rxu hpdlo qhzvohwwhu wr khdu derxw qhz hErrnv.


